#### January 27 Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Pu Chen - Netflix (PUC)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF & Vincit (EAO)
- Long Ho - Dropbox (LHO)
- Mike McKenna - PayPal (MGM)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Jeff Genovy - Microsoft (JMG)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (SMY)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Mick Monaghan - Guidewire - (MMN)
- Dan Chiba - Oracle (DCA)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF & Oracle (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (SMY)
- John Watson - Facebook (JRW)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Jan Mühlemann  - Locize (JMU)
- Janne Tynkkynen - PayPal (JMT)
- Nick Felker - Google (NFR)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts : 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)


## Next Meeting

February 24, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/12)

## Presentations

### Presentation 1

NIC: [presents slides](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1raElLNcFO3n_sRRKnjPzk9r4HVwpiOtN/view?usp=sharing)

MIH: This is kind of a feature that we like to support (inflections) , Every language would be different…”” The idea of a stand alone editor is nice but don’t think this should belong to be part of groups agenda. 

NIC: (presents slides)

GWR: Comment about how to handle the indefinite article in English. Can’t simply use vowels, need a dictionary for the edge cases. For example: a LED vs an LED, a unicorn vs an umbrella. French, Italian and Korean needs vowel pronunciation properties of words.

MIH: The way to approach things like this is to say, here's the functionality we want to support, and then look at a lot of languages.  We can ask linguists what you do with articles, for example.  In some languages you glue the article to the end of the word.  CLDR for example says, we want to represent yesterday and tomorrow, and send the request to linguists, and then figure out the constructs they need to support it.  So you learn from linguists before you model functionality.

NIC: +1.  Doing a global deep-dive to figure out how it works is good because otherwise your implementation will miss something.

MIH: The idea of a standalone editor looks nice, but I'm not sure if that should be part of this group's deliverables.  Once you have a standard syntax out there, someone can build this in a weekend.  It's a bit like telling developers, I'm designing a feature in this language, and then you have to use this special tool to use it.  In the end we want this to be adopted by CAT tools, and if you want something separate, that's fine.

NIC: The problem is that MessageFormat has been there for a while.  I see this as a marketing tool, whereas if you don't have an easy way to test it out, it might be a longer path to integration.

SMY: This group should design the AST so that the ecosystem can adopt it.  We should think about things like syntax highlighting, for example, so that the end result can cater to these use cases well.  I also agree about this being a marketing tool, where I can send people a link.  It has an educational purpose as well.

RCA : The goal of the WG was to bring new ideas to MF, and all presentations and contributions for our group are welcome. I think that the presentation was great and tools and demo presented can be an example of Plugins/Tools that can be built on top of future MF API. 

### Presentation 2

EAO: [presents slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1nJrKnr2Unja12YsByrvAS2cK3UKC__1mO-PSXK102ro/edit#slide=id.p)

NIC: How would this work with a large set of dynamic variables (e.g. list of cities)?  It could be a large dataset.  Have you tried to build… is there a limitation in terms of dataset?

EAO: Probably not, if I understand the question right.  With my experience, with input of MessageFormat messages, whether simple or complex, the output of a pre-compiled JavaScript source… in particular, when you zip the output, it's very minimally more than the output of the messages you've got.

PUC: Is there any special plural rule feature being supported in this tool compared to intl.pluralrule?

PUC: Is there any special feature for this tool compared to the existing JavaScript message formatting tools?

EAO: This is an existing JavaScript tool.  JavaScript does not itself have MessageFormat.

ZBI: You said you're using your own plural rules.  What are the differences between that and Intl.PluralRules?

EAO: Backwards compatibility.  This may change relatively soon when people stop caring about supporting IE 11.  But the rules are the same as the Intl.PluralRules polyfill.

JMG: It looked like MessageFormat took a list of "supported locales", how does it handle fallback for the locales?

EAO: It only does very simply fallback by (paraphrasing) truncating from the right. Only the first / primary subtag matters.  The only exception is pt-BR versus pt-PT.
JMG: I think ideally it would be great if this could pluggable

## Process

### Requirements List

Review : 
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/3 

RCA: There is a lot of great activity in this thread.  I've started putting together a project board to organize this.  Do you agree with this approach?  Does anyone else have ideas?

NIC: There are some requirements that are bigger topics.  Are we expecting to discuss or find closure on these?

MIH: I think we need to split this long thread somehow.  I'm totally fine with the way you proposed it with the project board.  Is there a way to comment there?  I think it would be nice to be able to isolate these kinds of threads with a comment.  Can we have a thread of comments?  It would be useful to have, before going to voting, we're going to end up with something that is not very consistent in the end.

ZBI: You can file an issue out of every comment.  And we shouldn't vote; that's not how you design great software.

RCA: You can associate the project board items with comments. (demonstrates on screen)

NIC: Maybe before we create the cards, agreeing on what the list is.  I think each item in that list should spin out a new issue.  Then each card should correspond to an issue.

MIH: I think some of these issues need cleaner description.  Some of them are 5-10 words. The person who suggested that knows what that means, but not others.

To-Do: Owners of the requirements should create separate issues for them.

RCA : Soon as we split this in separated issues i will work on labeling and create documentation to support this workflow of creating new issues/requirements

## Discussions

### Support messages in HTML

ECH: I think the question is, whatever we decide, should HTML be considered from the get-go, or can we design something that is flexible enough that it can support HTML as yet another file format as any other file format or syntax?  I've been working on the backend of a CAT tool supporting HTML, so I have some thoughts on this.

MIH: After seeing the presentation and back-and-forth, I think we need to support some kind of HTML tagging.  You can have a string hard-coded in your JavaScript, which could have HTML, like bold tags and such.  I really don't think we can say, localization tools handle HTML properly and we are just good.  Because that's not the case.  They do have HTML, they do support placeholders, but no tool I know supports a mixture: HTML placeholders that will be replaced at runtime.  The only framework I know that does something like that is okapi.

NIC: To add to that, most commercial tools use okapi, that support multiple layers of filters.  This might be a place where it's good to include linguists.

MIH: I'm afraid the trouble is that you've seen some tools that are online.  There are big tools that have big shares of the market that don't support subfiltering.

NIC: I'm 99% sure that SDL supports this case.

ECH: Back to the question of HTML.  I was using okapi.  MIH introduced it to me.  I was tasked with supporting a file format that was protobuf with HTML embedded inside of it.  The thing for me was that the okapi data model was able to support HTML just as much as it was able to support JSON or anything else.  So I see no reason why we can't do something similar for MessageFormat.  The scope is that we're talking about a specific message.  A message in MessageFormat isn't a full document worth of stuff.

ECH: I think it's also interesting as a point of reference for the problems we had with our old CAT tool, Google Translator Toolkit (GTT).  GTT represented all input documents as HTML.  You can visualize what you're translating, and that worked to a point until it didn't work.  This thing is our localization medium, it's our preview, and it's a one-stop shop.  It seems convenient, but conflating those concerns creates complexity.  The okapi model simplifies things.

ECH: Taking a step back, I think people call it AST, to me it seems the data model.  If we understand the input we give to the function, we can handle the HTML case.
ECH: We might even want to have a separate thread for terminology and concepts.

ZBI: Even within the thread of HTML support, there are multiple levels we can talk about.  One the other hand, we can recognize HTML as an important description language.  At the very least we can think about avoiding special symbols that have special meaning in HTML.  But we can also dig much deeper.  If you look at Fluent, I would question some assumptions.  You said we should think on the level of a message.  Maybe we should think at the level of a UI widget, where you have a binding to the elements of the widget.  I think HTML, QML, would challenge thinking on the level of a function call.  Maybe we don't have to go for a single function.

ECH: I understand that use case.  What's important is the essential data that we're passing in.  Being able to go beyond the level of a single message and seeing many messages is something that a TMS or higher-level framework can do as long as you uniquely tag each message.  For something like Fluent, that's extra functionality that doesn't exist in ICU MessageFormat, which is fine, but to couple that into the discussion doesn't seem necessary.

MIH: I agree about not overly coupling things.  You have text units, segments, etc.  In okapi, you can represent HTML or markup or anything else.

ZBI: I share the sentiment that if we can reduce the scope, it's better, because the scope is already massive.  But the majority of what I hear you saying is embedding HTML into a localization message.  A separate challenge is binding HTML to a localization message.  If you think of a specific string and linking it to a specific element, that's an interesting problem space.  If we think about making out solution work for HTML, it introduces different challenges for designing an API that binds to a complicated UI widget. (Think Web Components)

MIH: I agree.  The way I see this is that we need to support both variations out of the box: html with MessageFormat syntax inside (full document or fragment), and MessageFormat “strings” (or messages) with html tags.
Example 1 (MF syntax in html fragment): closure-templates (and more precise here)
Example 2 (html in MF “message”): msgId = Hello {user}, click <a href="...">here</a>...

GWR: We should support not only HTML but also SSML.  Not only written, but also spoken.

ZBI: In our experience, a lot of HTML bindings are needed for accessibility technologies.

MIH: We should separate the concept of the data model from the raw syntax.
Mihai: I’ll try to put something together before the next meeting.


RCA: For the next meeting we agreed that we are gonna split issues from the initial requirements lists(Bag of ideas). This will be done by "owners" of feature request.




