#### September 21 Attendees:

- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- David Filip - ADAPT Centre @ Trinity College Dublin (DAF)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (STA)
- Maria Esteban - Expedia (MNE)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

October 19, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda

- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/115)

Easy way to volunteer to participate in Chair Group : [Link](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/70)

We should go ahead and get started

###Moderator : Romulo Cintra

### Chair Group Announcements

### Test Cases

GRH: These test cases support our use cases for Siri, and encodes features that we support. For example, in Spanish, the definite article applies to the “and” of the last item in a list. This is true in Italian and Korean.

NIC: In CLDR, there is data to support this particular case of the last item of item list.

GRH: I’m not sure that the data exists for CLDR, for example for Korean, and that there’s an issue. In addition, there is information about how to pronounce a number. Russian has the ultimate complexity -- you have grammatical gender, grammatical number, and grammatical case, in addition to the plural rules that CLDr defines. All those factors combine that make grammatical agreement challenging.

This test syntax allows intermixing of different namespaces, ex: using the SSML namespace to define certain thing, like this section only applies in a “spoken” or “written” context.

STA: Thanks for elaborating test cases with the Russian example, Polish is in the same category. Would that definition be a part of our data model or would be an external thing?

GRH: Within Siri, we have a semantic feature model, as opposed to a “data model”. We have semantic feature concepts. In Spanish, “cometa”, it matters whether it is masculine or feminine, depending on the gender, it can either mean “kite” or “comet”. We have labels and categories of that label. The label

STA: In teh context of MF as a standard, do you think as a group, we should limit ourselves to how to call into that data, or should we be encoding how to store that data?

GRH: That’s a longer discussion. I think Fluent does this.

STA: In Fluent, we wanted one solution to solve both cases, where for example, we store that this is a genetive case. Which is why Siri is interesting to me.

GRH: Within Siri, resolving ambiguous inputs is done in an external

EAO: On this topic, we should do both.

DAF: On the topic of namespaces, I wanted to sh

ECH: Are we trying to store all of this information? GRH mentioned dictionaries, TM, MT. If we try to make it possible to reference all of these different semantic variants, then we end up with a sentence-generation engine. Rather than message formatting. (ECH - PLEASE REVIEW)

GRH: In message formatting, there will always be issues with noun and adjective inflection. We need something that’s functional and can cover it. A lot of translators are not able to get sentences into grammatical agreement in the current systems.

NIC: I agree, it does seem more similar to NLG than simple formatting. No systems support this today. My concern is that solving it for all cases and all languages is going to be huge. I don’t see how it could ship as part of the platform. But maybe as something that apps could inject?

GRH: I’m not saying this is easy.

RCA: I have a similar question. Should we support similar semantic behaviour on MF?

GRH: Siri and Fluent (to some extent) do it. So at least two solutions. We should discuss it.

STA: We should put this as a topic on the agenda for whether and how data is stored and ships along with the model. We’re talking about a huge repository of data.

ECH: Also, there are licensing issues - what should it be? And where should it be stored? Wikidata (public domain license)?

DAF: I think we all agree that it is an orthogonal problem, and that the repository is outside of the data model. I would like to see the ability of the data model to tap into the repository or especially tap into CLDR. But I think this is orthogonally related. There is a demand for semantic relation in the word.

GRH: CLDR has already stated that they don't want this data because of this fine grain level of detail and this quantity of data. Even if we don't have all of the data, at least we can make things functional. But I’m okay with the default approach we have currently of just specifying

EAO: This sounds like it is a strong argument that the core of MF should be flexible for anything it does. I believe that the core should not contain any data. If the data comes, it won’t come immediately, and when it comes, it will be a huge payload. But no matter what, the structure will not be fixed, it will have breaking changes. So if we include data, then it means we will be talking about MessageFormat for a long time, as MF v3, v4, v5, etc. But what we can do is define functions for transformations that take a few or many arguments that perform what we want.

STA: I like the idea that we can tap into CLDR and have the data defined somewhere else. But what we’ve seen with Fluent is that we only need this semantic information and inflect for brand names. If you have text that appears in the UI, and you are translating it, you just write out the string. We only needed inflections for brand names because they change. Siri makes me see a different use case because nouns come from the user. Maybe we can have a common set of nouns and inflections. Maybe we can define how the data is stored, so that developers ship a data model of messages and a data structure of data.

GRH: You’re right, we can ship inflections of brand names. But for inflections, we would have to ship code to do it, and sometimes it has to be done algorithmically,

EAO: Sometimes, it’s not even possible, in Finnish, people can define how it is defined, like if a word is used a person’s name, they can define how the inflection is pronounced.

STA: In Fluent, we solve this by defining how to degrade gracefully. If the data is available, we use it. If not, we default to the “other” variant which uses an auxiliary noun. If the gender of $userName is not known, the “other” variant reads “The user $userName did something”, and now the gender of the subject of that sentence (“the user”) is known.

DAF: I think everyone agrees that it is a repository type of data. I understand that if CLDR does want this data, then it can be stored somewhere else. It’s not a part of the message nor the payload, but if it is stored elsewhere, it can be tapped into.

DAF: I think there is no end to this. I think it is wrong to not expand CLDR and think that it is has solved all

GRH: I don’t think CLDR is a good fit, and that there should be a separate repository of lexicon data.

RCA: Point of order - we should define how “external” (data) could be injected or used within MF. Also, I agree with STA’s proposal to create a task force around talking about such a repository.

ECH: On the topic of lexical data, my talk in the upcoming Unicode Conference is related to that, at least adjacent to it. My talk also describes the challenges for languages like Tamil. When I think about that, what does “common” mean for “common names”? “Common” is relative to whom? Also, I think we want to be flexible because approaches right now for Tamil appear to be data-based rather than algorithm-based, and it’s not easy to come up with the algorithms, but it is doable. But ICU BreakIterator and normalization don’t handle splitting up abugida script data, and are we even thinking about it? We already agree that the problem is big, and I think it is even bigger than what we even realize.

DAF: If we need to support multiple namespaces, there are options for JSON namespace support. We started using underscores in the JSON keys as a way of simulating namespaces, in the same way that XML uses hyphens.

RCA: Any suggestions to be more specific or reword this issue on Github?

### Taskforce Efforts for #103

MIH: Presenting [Slides](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-6t6Yl5RHZI9QZwBDrFrl1fqSKSA4IMs1ef60IxD3lU/edit#)

The main discussion was about whether we want to support whole message selection, or “in-message” selection - we allow the selection of pieces of the message.

We didn’t end up with a clear decision because we are not authorized to make a decision and the point is to present the information to the main group to have everyone review and decide.

The pros and cons are somewhat related, since the pros for one can be the cons for the other.

The pros for message-level selectors are that it is friendly for translators b/c context exist outside of individual words and phrases. This is compatible with localization (l10n) tools. It makes it easy for implementers of the MFWG data model. Cons are that it is unfriendly of developers because it is verbose. (creators of messages) Verbosity also affects bandwidth of data over the wire. Also, developers (message authors) must decide whether to make a message part of a select even if the source language “doesn’t need it” (example, the source language has a single plural category, like Chinese, and a message has a number placeholder).

NIC: Can we also add “scalability” to the cons of message-level selectors?

MIH: Is that the same thing as verbosity over the wire? Let’s get through the rest and discuss.

The sub-selector approach is friendly for developers, but unfriendly for translators. It is harder to grep for text or integrate with TMSes (l10n tools).

One other important point is that either form (full-message selectors and sub-message selectors) is equivalent to the other, so we can convert back and forth between them.

RCA: Let’s open 10 mins for discussion, questions, and doubts. In the last 5 minutes, if you have a decision, then we can come to a decision together.

EAO: I do not think that we will come to a decision on which form to have (full-message vs sub-message selector), but I think we should agree that we must ensure that we have processing so that every message can be converted into full message form internally.

MIH: I don’t know what it means that we cannot come to a decision. Either form can be converted to the other, so they’re the same.

EAO: But it means that if the message is written in in-message selectors, then round tripping will not be possible if it gets converted to full-message selectors, it gets translated, and it’s not clear how to convert it back to the in-message selectors.

ZBI: Round-tripping is necessary for version control systems. If a translated message of a sub-message selector message comes back with full-message selectors, then it will change in version control.

EAO: This is a real-world scenario, and I don’t know how to resolve this.

DAF: I do think we discussed this in the task force, and I think STA was a proponent for what EAO was saying. I was saying both things, allow developers to use syntax of in-message selectors, but it will always be represented externally using full-message selectors. I personally think that this is the only way to make it translator-friendly and TMS-friendly and to work with l10n tools. I think this addresses both points.

RCA: Did we capture both points that EAO brought up?

DAF: We did address this in the discussion because STA brought this up.

STA: I have trouble remembering, but I felt that after realizing the shortcomings of the sub-message selectors, I viewed the full-message selectors as preferable to solve those problems.

RCA: I’m not sure if we fully agree, but perhaps we can continue the discussion offline somehow.

ECH: Let’s have a followup task force session to have people who disagree to join and discuss.

MIH: I have a feeling that, as a group, we may not fully agree. But I don’t know how to break the deadlock.

STA: This is a good point to separate personal opinions from objective merits. It would be good to dig into the use cases of round-tripping (ex: version control) and see if there are objective reasons to support or reject an option, and we can investigate in the meantime.

DAF: (from chat) In reply to STA: I would support a layered approach. At the syntax level, we can support the nested selector approach in syntax and then have full-message messages when sending off to translation.
In reaction to STA, the conversion would not be necessarily lossy. In L10n we work with this paradigm of extraction and merging. L10n happens between these brackets. And it is always assumed that merger has the full knowledge of the extraction process.

RCA: I will send an invite for the next task force for next week. And then push the regular chair group meeting to the following week. Anyone who wants an invite to the task force meeting, let me know.

EAO: I would like to be invited to the meeting.

RCA: The task force meeting started an hour earlier in order to allow for an extra hour of discussion. I will schedule the next task force meeting in the same way.
