#### December 14th Meeting Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Luke Swartz - Google (LHS)
- Mihai Nita (MIH)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Colin Sprague - DocuSign (CLS)
- Standa Rygal - Expedia (STR)
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- David Filip - ADAPT Centre @ Trinity College Dublin (DAF)
- Robert Heinz - Nike (RHZ)
- Shane Carr (SFC)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

January 18, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/134)
Propose Consensus on - external selectors -
How we should represent the Data Model ? - Syntax, Language, Format...
Plan the work on data model - merge/normalize existing proposals
Dynamic References #130

Easy way to volunteer to participate in Chair Group :  [Link](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/70)

We should go ahead and get started
 
### Moderator : Romulo Cintra

## Propose Consensus on - external selectors -

RCA: We've discussed this topic for the last few meetings? Who wants to summarize?

ZBI: I can summarize since I brought up sticking points. I think we should settle the debate and move on.

EAO: I think we should have some text to name or detail what exactly we're agreeing on.

RCA: We should do this now as a good conclusion for 2020.

ZBI: STA, I suggest you since you are a good person to incorporate all ideas and summarize.

STA: Should we have this ready for our first meeting in January?

ZBI: This is something that we should vote on and have a clear definition of what we're voting on when we do.

EAO: I propose that we move on to the issue of dynamic references since it is very intertwined with the issue of external selectors.

## Dynamic References #130

ZBI: EAO's response on issue #130 makes me think that this is not a simple, short conversation.

EAO: It got me to thinking about what "keys" mean. What does it mean to have top-level selectors to take in messages that allow more than variable to do the selection. We lose any difference between keys of a bundle and an additional term in the message selector input. This is why I think external selectors and dynamic references conversations are the same. In my comment, I show that there are different ways in which dynamic references can happen in MF 2.0, and we should work with it instead of against it.

EAO: I want us to raise our awareness that if we allow top-level selectors with multiple variables, then we effectively allow multi-level nested message bundles which in turn support dynamic references.

ZBI: This gets at a major limitation of previous 

MIH: I don't see that this implication is actually happening, or that these things are connected. My understanding of what he's saying is that by allowing selectors at one level, it's like enabling keys of a message. Is that the idea?

EAO: Yes, to some extent, go on.

MIH:  One, I don't think they are the same thing. No system that I know of creates messages dynamically at some point. If you create 5 messages with 5 ids, you get 5 messages with 5 ids. So I don't see selectors as keys. There is glue logic to handle fallbacks for when messages don't exist.

STA: Can you explain how different keys are different messages?

MIH: Well, that was the part I wanted to verify my understanding with.

EAO: If we don't have selectors internally to a message, every message is a string or array of strings.  Or else it's a selector of some description. That's the example in my comment, where you have a name of a monster and you select the name of a monster from an object of monster names using a key.

STA: If I understand correctly, a month ago, we were talking about how we can define different levels with different keys, but this is like having a registry of monster names.

EAO: Yes, and having a registry is equivalent to having dynamic references.

ZBI: MIH, what I think a bridge between what you're saying and EAO is saying, is how we encode it in a container is important to our mental data model looks like. EAO is saying we have a message, which is really a container of multiple messages. That has far-reaching implications, but we can resolve this in our mental model. I agree with EAO that it is inevitable.

EAO: Yes, and this falls out when we allow more than one selector. And since it's possible, it will be achieved through hacking, but I would rather it be standardized and not done through hacking.

MIH: We can always represent internal selectors as top-level selectors.  What I don't understand is why do we need dynamic references? Why not just allow arguments to to the monster-name selector? Why do we need a registry, and not go further and just have a function call?

ZBI: From the perspective of the call-site, you can't recognize whether the string was written as-is or came from a Spanish or French or other translation, it just looks like a string.

STA: I want to ask clarification from EAO. You said this is related to external selectors. But isn't this agnostic to external selectors?

ZBI: Can you clarify "multiple inputs for a selector"?

EAO: Look at the last example in teh Github issue comment.

message: |
  { $key, $monster ->
    [monster-name, dinosaur] Dinosaur
    [monster-name, elephant] Elephant
    [monster-name, ogre] Ogre
    [monster-name, other] Monster
    [killed-notice, other] You've been killed by a { $message(key: 'monster-name', monster: $monster) }
    [other, other] Error: Message not found
  }


STA: As soon as you have any sort of branching mechanism, you can suddenly create messages as a hashmap. But you then want to have some form of control over the keys in the form of a registry. Then you want to have consistency, ex: you don't want monster name keys also being supplied in Finnish.

EAO: I think you want that to be a linter thing but not a forced thing.

MIH: The jump to the last example seems hard to understand, 

EAO: 

STA: Are you saying that we need dynamic references because people will hack to get it anyways, in the same way that we need to support the internal selector case using message references?

ZBI: STA, I feel the same way you do, that people will hack around to achieve it, based on Fluent.

What I realized that EAO's position implies is that the hash map is another registry -- the keys determine what is allowed.

MIH: Do you see the last example as a hack, and the one above as not a hack?

ZIB: Yes 

MIH: So if we agree that the last example is a hack, and the one before it isn't a hack, then we have to see whether we can prevent the hack somehow.  So I think we can support the previous examples and either prevent the last example which is a hack in the data model, or at least have it flagged by a linter.

STA: This sounds like a workaround for the lack of dynamic of references? So I wonder, why didn't we use this in Firefox?

ZBI: I think we just didn't think of it.

STA: One possible reason we didn’t use it is because we set up continuous integration … it was not possible at mozilla to ensure that all of these could exist

STA: Top example looks nice in English, but many languages need more than one form for each noun. In other languages we will need more hacks to handle more forms of the same variable.

MIH: I agree with your argument that you need different lists, like a list for monster plural forms and a list for accusative case, etc. 

EAO: To clarify where I think we are currently in this discussion, where we are is that if we allow multiple top-level selectors, then we allow this sort of hacking in the messages, and we do not want to support that in MF 2.0. So what I think this means is that we have to clarify how to do dynamic references, not if it should be done.

STR: I thought the whole idea of top level selectors was to avoid the need to have dynamic selectors left in the translated messages. For the example of localizing into Czech, we need to also consider the grammatical case, and in this monster example, it wouldn't work because concatenation would not be grammatically correct.

EAO: You do not need to go beyond English to find problems… (a vs an example) …

MIH: The main goal of top level selection was to avoid things like this. The reason we do something like this is because developers have other ways to get around it. Developers will build the dynamic thing behind your back. By allowing this in a syntax, at least it is not behind our back and we can lint or validate or send to translators all at once and we get back a little bit of control.

STR: I see where you come from, MIH. From my perspective as a linguist, the solution to eliminate that is to create rules that prevent developers from doing that. Flag messages/translations that are i18n-unfriendly, and strings that are created this way are rejected. Prevent text in a variable, only allow numbers in a variable.

MIH: You cannot prevent them from doing that. Imagine you are Amazon “We just shipped your order of 5 books and 5 DVDs and 5 ….” There could be thousands of things and we cannot prevent them from adding something else.

ZBI: I completely agree, STR, that this would be great for translators. But if there are 100 monsters, then there are 100 messages. This is another case of explosion of parameters. 
What I think MIH was saying, and want to restate, is that there are edge cases. It has to happen, and the question is how. If we don’t allow for anything, people will hack around us. We can block it with linting and other methods, but people will still hack around it.

MIH: Looking at the last example, nobody likes it, I don’t know if we can block it in the syntax. We should really try to forbid direct recursion. It is one thing that I hate about MF. I don’t know how to prevent it, but I am happy that everyone wants to prevent it.

ZBI: I agree that cyclical (references) should not be allowed, and we should try to prevent them. They could also be used by hackers to break systems.

ZBI: The triad of nested, top, and dynamic (messages/selectors) has to be solved together, since deciding any one of them affects the other 2. So I'm just wondering if we recognize that we need to solve them together and cannot solve them as independent issues.

EAO: I think there is a position to take that we can recognize that the hacking is possible when selectors take multiple selector inputs. That is a step we can take if we all consent to taking that step.

RCA: I propose that we create this in a task force meeting and have a clearer discussion on this offline, as proposal 1. Or we can continue this on Github Issues or Github Discussions. Since we don't have time today to finish this discussion.

EAO: one important thing is that I have not heard anyone in this call state that they would not want us to allow selectors that take multiple inputs.

MIH: … it is a necessary evil. A compromise. We do not have to be happy about it.

MIH: (multiple selectors is a switch on tuples)

STA: It is surprising to me that this would not be desired. A list of selectors seems to me to be a necessary feature. If you have a longer sentence you will need more than one selector.

ZBI: I recommend people to look at the top, because I recommended how people can work around this problem, and I also talk about the impact to GUIs. I would like people to decide how we can work around that.

RCA: What should we do to move this forward?  Ok, let's create a task force for this, look for an email or a message about setting that up in the future.

## How should we represent the Data Model ? - Syntax, Language, Format…

RCA: We can probably mix the next two items (how to represent and how to plan the work). Who wants to start?

STA: In the Chair Group meeting, we were trying to pick a candidate for a unified solution for a data model. Then I realized we need 2 different solutions, one to describe the data model itself (schema), and then another to describe the data itself. In the Chair Group, we were looking at TypeScript type description, which is fairly descriptive if you know Java or other statically-typed languages. But that doesn't solve the question of messages themselves, or message examples.

Generic typescript could be used to describe a list of elements. Should there be a canonical example syntax that we would like to continue using. Personal thought: I kind of like how some languages represent objects (C#, Rust) name of class, open brace, fields. That could be one of the ideas that I could throw into discussion.

MIH: Is there a way to represent maps where keys can be arrays?  Do you know any syntax that I can use arrays for keys?

ZBI: Something that I remember striking from TS enums are very underdeveloped and a poor attempt that was inconsistently linted. Coming from Rust where they are core and the data model is good at enforcing it it became counterproductive using enums in Typescript.

STA: The answer to this is twofold. Enums in Rust are unions, not enums. A more important point is that the Chair Group was thinking of this purely for example use cases in discussions. I don't think it would be a huge problem to represent things in TypeScript types, even if it doesn't compile.

STA: Rather than type out the entire sentence, the attempt is to have a really easy to use syntax. I am with ZBI on using Rust for prototyping…

STA: It is important to make a distinction between schema and example. In a schema nothing stops me from writing

Schema syntax: Map<Array, Value>

MIH: It is totally fine if it doesn’t compile.

ECH: edn is to Closure what JSON is to Javascript. It is fundamental to the language… If you want a one sentence synopsis it is like cleaned up JSON. It has int and float and other numbers. You have heterogeneous collections. Data is data. … you can also tag things, making it extensible. 

MIH: Are there parsing libraries for edn in major languages?

ECH: Yes. Already there.

MIH: The benefit of examples is not just for us to share amongst ourselves. Unit tests for instance, we want to use them across languages and show that they give the same results. Be able to write a validation test suite for what we build.

ECH: Definitely libraries in Ruby, Python and other major languages. This solves some of the JSON limitations.

MIH: It doesn’t solve how to represent the schema.

ECH: I wouldn’t use it to represent the schema.

MIH: It doesn’t matter if it doesn’t compile, but it would be nice if it does compile. What about Java? The schema can be compiled in Java with no changes.

STA: Example syntax

    HashMap {
        [1, 2]: Pattern {value = “...”},
        Array {1, 2}: Pattern {value = “....”},
    }

Seems like a fairly standard way of showing objects. 

ZBI: Rust has it…

EAO: I recommend Typescript for schema. We probably can’t find something that it doesn’t support

RCA: Looks like we have a strong candidate: Typescript for schema [mostly positive responses]

MIH: Let’s take the models proposed already by ZBI, ECH, and MIH and rewrite them in Typescript and put them in parallel and see if we come up with similar stuff and similar blockages.

MIH/EAO: Let’s not go with JSON because of unreadability.

RCA: The proposal here as said by MIH … Can I create a task for this? Everyone who has created a representation can work together to come up with what is possible to represent them in the syntax.

MIH: I can write the schemas with typescript but it would be better for the authors to do it.

RCA: Can we try out Typescript for the schema? Also, MIH, ZBI, ECH, can you work closely together on the schemas of the existing data model prototypes and come to a proposal.

## Plan the work on data model - merge/normalize existing proposals


MIH: I think we can do this in two steps. One, to represent the existing proposals, and then second to discuss and iterate.

EAO: Let’s use the facilities that github provides for us to collaborate on this.

MIH: Before going into a task force, I would like to prototype some things. I can convert my stuff in less than a week if you want.

MIH: Suggestion: open an issue in github “rewrite data models in typescript”. Everyone who submits in GH can link to an issue. Let’s see what we get.

RCA: Wrapping up. I will open a GH issue where we can follow up on the data model proposals.

## Miscellaneous

MIH: New topic. Should we try to reach out to people in other organizations that used to attend this meeting and have been missing recently?

ZBI: Suggest waiting until we have data model proposals and send it to them for feedback. We hope to move faster when we have it.

RCA: They are probably watching what we are doing. I have the numbers of each meeting and we dropped attendance by 4 -6 people in the last trimester. But more people joined after the conference.

EAO: Question from SFC about increasing the meeting length to 2 hrs starting in 2021.

RCA: From ECMA-402, did you find that increasing the meeting length helped?

SFC: With 402 we were running out of time so we went to 2.5 hours with a 15 minute break. I don’t want the bottleneck to be not enough discussion time.

ZBI: This meeting (compared to all others I participate in) seems to have the highest amount of back and forth in the meeting and the lowest amount outside the meeting. I would prefer to not extend and keep stricter bounds to move us along and use the asynchronous discussion outside the meeting.

RCA: Extending the meeting is difficult for earlier time zones. It’s hard to keep going on 402 for that reason. 

MIH: I think the task force meetings are also cramped by trying to allow all time zones to attend. Maybe we should be open to 1-3 person meetings as long as they are very well documented. I also don’t want to be exclusive… too closed.







