#### June 15 Attendees:
- Pablo Velez - Expedia (PAV)
- Rafael Xavier de Souza - PayPal / OpenJSF (RXS)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- David Filip - ADAPT Centre @ Trinity College Dublin (DAF)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (STA)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH) 
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Ben Michel - OpenJS Foundation (BPM)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Maria Esteban - Expedia (MNE)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)


## Next Meeting

July  20, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
Why MessageFormat needs a successor [#49](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/49)
Design Principles [#88](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/88), [#68](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/68), [#64](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/64), [#63](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/63), [#62](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/62), [#60](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/60), [#50](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/50)
 
### Why MessageFormat needs a successor #49 

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/49

RCA: Presenting agenda for the day. Asking ECH how to use the tool to ask questions/topics.
 
RCA: MIH please drive the presentation. No timebox for this one, hope it's short.
 
MIH: Trying to show PR as doc - ZIBI showed how it's done.
 
MIH: Good comments received from STA and NIC. As a short intro about MessageFormat is detailed in the PR doc.
 
What is important to discuss is the main four bullets regarding current problems with MessageFormat:
 1. No extension points: right now is too rigid. You need to get alignment from different ICU users to get changes in. This limitation makes it difficult to add and deprecate unrequired stuff.
 2. Can't remove anything, even we know is wrong: related to the last point above.
 3. Hard to map to existing loc core structures: not only TMS, but specifically on how parsing is done. Most systems pass the string as is and then translators can mess things up. TM leverage may work, but pluralization may be wrong. 
 4. MessageFormat was meant to be used via an API: Not meant to be localized as it’s. Its limited in how many messages it can reference. The advantage is that it can be stored in any file format type. Along with some additional benefits listed in the doc, this advantage should be preserved.
 
No more of a presentation, I want to have a discussion.

RCA: so far no questions in TCQ.
 
STA: About the second bullet, it's actually a benefit if you see this as a standard. Its not meant to be modified easily.
 
MIH: We could list these benefits, but not sure it belongs in this document. 
 
STA: From my perspective it would make sense to include it.
MIH: Tried to go one level up and focus on core problems.
 
RCA: Sorry skipped DAF.
 
DAF: its an advantage from a standard, but dont think is MIH’s point. The problem is the old form is 20 years old.
 
Things were not designed modularly, nowadays, things are designed modularly.  The core needs to be stable, but you want to be able to deprecate or add features.
 
MIH: I had a chat with ECH before the meeting. We thought it would be possible for the standard to have placeholders with flags that can be changeable (for dates, times, numbers).
 
The core itself doesn't change, but the catalog over time evolves.  Unicode does it -- BCP47 (for locales) hasn't changed in a long time, but the IANA registry (of valid locale subtags) does 
 
MIH: Maybe a registration mechanism for these placeholders?
 
ECH: I am just agreeing with STA's suggestion that a list of specific problems in MessageFormat would be useful in this same document.  The document, as it is, does well to list out the high-level problems and explanations.  But specific problems could be useful for future reference.
 
STA: we should define a core and extend it when possible. Maybe going ahead, but how this is phrased it looks like we can MessageFormat 2 because we cant change MessageFormat 1.
 
MIH: If we have a registry next to the standard, we can flag/tag if something is deprecated vs what is recommended.  Some things relate to the structure, and those are interesting.  Otherwise, we can use the registry.
 
STA: This might be a way to improve the wording. But the localization industry moves very slowly. Something to consider.
 
MIH: Notification notice more for developers. Not for loc industry. 
 
STA: Understood.
 
DAF: You’re saying you grandfather instead of deprecate, right? But talking about design goals, the primary consensus should be forward compatibility. Backwards compatibility should be in the backburner. This is all connected -- modular design, etc.  Modular design allows you to create something to make something forwards-compatible. This can be achieved with a modular design - system of principles.
 
This is why XLIFF 2 cant be compatible with the previous versions.
 
MIH: In the doc I was approaching why we need a new format, not the design principles. But we could merge point 1 and 2, would it make more sense?
 
NIC: Difficult to predict if there’s a breaking change. Do we want to implement this way or another more hacky way? It's a judgment call, some may be breaking changes.  We could also consider versioning as a way to distinguish between feature sets that may require breaking changes.
 
RCA: Are we going to timebox this topic? We are missing some parts of the design principle. We need consensus on the document from MIH. I propose 10 more min and if there’s a conclusion, merge the PR.
 
STA: I think these points tie into the design principles well.
 
MIH: What does the group think it's actionable items now? Merge 1 and 2? And do you think points from STA to real examples where MessageFormat is wrong, should it be mentioned in this document?
 
RCA: We don't have a voting mechanism. A +1 in the chat would do.
 
STA: Jumping to my reply on TCQ. To wrap up my comments, I saw point 2 as mistakes made, but MIH just used them as a high-level reference, right?
 
MIH: Yes.
 
STA: How about merge point 1 and 2 in one about modular design. And then add point 2 to list mistakes in the old MessageFormat.
 
MIH: Mistakes were captured in the other bullets. But I will try to organize this better and list the mistakes in one bullet point.
 
STA: Thank you.
 
MIH: Let's move the discussion to GitHub. Team said +1 to the proposal.
 
DAF: Agree.
 
RCA: Deadline for this as we did for goals. What should be the timeline for this topic?
 
DAF: Propose postponing merging until next meeting, but discuss in Github.
 
RCA: Agree with DAF. Next is STA.

## Design Principles #88, #68, #64, #63, #62, #60, #50

[Design Principle: Compatible vs. Breaking #88](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/88)
[Design Principle: Data Model vs. Syntax #68](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/68)
[Design Principle: People-Friendly vs. Machine-Friendly #64](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/64)
[Design Principle: Resilient vs. Strict #63](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/63)
[Design Principle: DRY vs. WET #62](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/62)
[Design Principle: Computational vs. Manual #60](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/60)
[Design Principles #50](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/50)

STA: About Design principles, first thanks for comments on goals vs non-goals. I listed 6 goals of the group, 5 design principles and expanded on 9 non goals.
 
The idea to move to design principles is to help us understand how we are going to do it and decisions to make. Especially when we have to make trade-offs.
 
I was looking at them before through the lens of Fluent and syntax. Initially I was looking at design principles from this perspective. But the discussion with goals, it made me realize we thought in terms of syntax but we want to be more focused on the data model (ex. UML diagrams). A description of the data model.
 
-STA presenting doc (issue #50) with principles-
 
Does anyone have any comments?
 
MIH: Modularity with backwards compatibility should be merged. But your principles should still apply.
 
GWR: In regards to backwards/forward compatibility, how you name things is hard. It took a decade for example for Hebrew on how to manage gender for numbers, when the noun is there or not.
 
This is an example on how it's going to be difficult to name these concepts. Not sure how to work with this.
 
Finnish is another language with complex casing.
 
MIH: This part on names, we could abstract it or remove it to the part that changes in the standard. We could manage this with the placeholder for changes, including plurals, cases, like in the example from GWR. I wouldn't try to code all grammatical features in the code standard.
 
RCA: Reply from ECH.
 
ECH: We have a set of features we want to support. How do we pass this as data and how design our data model to represent it. These are separate things. 
 
STA: The discussion about design principle is difficult because it is abstract. Lets take computational vs manual as an example.
 
One extreme example: one dictionary with all possible grammatical cases. Then you need a data model for it, but it manages all possibilities.
 
But on the other extreme (manual): You don't have this dictionary, it's up to the translator to identify the cases he/she needs. 
 
MIH: The standard would provide a placeholder with an id to the string it refers to. Also a place for the developer to specify the genitive form. Then a machine, human can be plugging in these variations.  For example, maybe I know how to determine genitive forms for Slavic languages, but when it comes to Finnish, I have no idea, so I have to give it to translators.
 
STA: In this view the data model only describes the declaration for the specific case.
 
DAF: Rule-based machine translation seems what STA was referring to with the computational example.  And this is not really feasible to perform for all rules for all languages.
 
STA: Agree with DAF and that's how Fluent was developed. But I was impressed with how Siri replied to me with correct nouns in my language.
 
GWR: The way Siri does it is with a library to manage all extreme cases. For some languages it would use machine-learning models, like with Russian. But sometimes it does the same as Fluent - hardcoding multiple solutions to come up with one.
 
Example with ‘Cometa’ in Spanish as it can be masculine or feminine depending on the context. 
 
Translators are not linguists. Software engineers will not know how to reference either. 
 
Not an easy solution. It's a hard topic, but I recommend we should have a default set and be fluid to modify as needed.
 
RCA: Next is EAO.
 
EAO: This looks like a process we can go on forever. Let's choose one specific thing, try to support it with a PR, and then see how people respond and which possibilities close off as a result. How many selectors should we have in MessageFormat2? Fluent has only 1. 
 
RCA: Clarifying question. Should we do a list of items to start working on? And then from this build the syntax model to solve these problems, discuss during the meetings.
 
EAO: Let’s pick up at least one dimension, discuss and agree on the principle as we go.
 
STA: We have spent 3 months discussing abstract topics like goals vs non-goals. We need to move to tangible actions, for example with the principles.
 
MIH: GWR covered what I wanted to say. Both extremes have challenges - trying to plan for all grammatical variations or give a lot of flexibility. Agree with GWR to define a set of what we know we can describe and use it to go forward.
I have an idea on how to move forward: I have a data model proposal that captures Fluent, MessageFormat and Facebook standard. We take some of the features we want and we try to plug it in to try and see if the data model works, and if not, we can iterate on the data model.  We can leave aside the features that relate to syntax (escaping, double new line).
 
STA: I like that, I think it would work.
 
NIC: Agree, we can get lost with all grammar and language-specific issues. The key is not to corner ourselves, but try to start using something- echo STA. And yes, we need design principles.
 
RCA: Next is DAF.
 
DAF: Computational vs manual not the right axis to start with. We can look at a different axis / dimension to start off with. Forward compatibility should be the first principle. Backward compatibility is a different, more complicated issue. We should make progress in the design principles, before deep-diving in grammatical challenges.
 
RCA: Any reply to DAF?
 
RCA: We are aware of the principles we want to go after first -  they are tied to our goals. We should start moving forward like proposed by MIH, explore what he proposed and do as EAO proposed, deep-dive in one issue.
 
Start working on the model and capture issues in Github for further discussions and jump into the work.
 
EAO: We need someone to call out the first question we want to focus on.
 
RCA: Lets vote in the last 15m on the topic we want to tackle first.
 
MIH: Should we start with the data model proposed a while ago in the slides? for example message level selectors. As a translator, some of the flags would be read-only, others you can change the value or you could select the value from a list of options.
 
STA: About forward/backward compatibility. Valuable to have different approaches to design principles. It's important to have some compatibility strategy as part of this modular strategy for the standard. DAF can you expand on the roundtrip principle?
 
DAF: When you think about the language matrix, everyone most likely starts from English as the starting language. But if you take Chinese, Finnish you’re introducing way more parameters from the beginning.
 
For the roundtrip principle, I can give a short presentation on the capabilities of the localization formats to protect content grouping/ segmentation.
 
STA: I would like to hear this presentation.
 
RCA: ECH is back
 
ECH: It looks like we were discussing a design principle first, but then we switched to implementing a feature to test a data model. Both are different things. 
 
If we do features, it will be more tangible and help inform the design principles discussion.
 
MIH: DAF proposed capabilities from existing systems. I'm going to share an introduction for engineers and am going to coordinate with DAF if we could present together. 
 
DAF: Yes, we can try and present at the next meeting.
 
MIH: 190 grammatical features listed in a site I shared with the team in the chat-  this is the link:
 
https://wals.info/languoid
Examples of axes:
https://wals.info/feature
 
RCA: What should be next steps? First pick a feature and use the proposed data model to see if it works.
 
STA: Yes, a concrete example. 
 
RCA: Vague but it's the next step. Then is design principles that can help guideline the concrete example we need to identify.
 
In the next chair meeting we should identify this topic.
 
EAO: As long as we pick something, it's fine if we can delegate the choosing of the example with someone in the team.
 
RCA: I will share some options, we can discuss offline and then we decide for our next meeting.
 
And GWR can you please share more of your concerns?
 
GWR: I have something to present for the Unicode conference. I will get back to the team if I can share something here.
 
RCA: MIH and DAF lets coordinate if you guys want to present at the next meeting. 

[Full discussion and chat notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-zfWS829ciB96F6qioxaIOuqrNfw7IO6UlNckaSGS_0/edit?usp=sharing)

## Next Action Item 

Find a concrete message format use case and start prototyping (to be discussed further int the next char meeting).

