#### January 6 Attendees:

- Addison Phillips - Amazon (APS)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Rafael Xavier - PayPal (RX)
- Richard Gibson - Oracle & OpenJSF (RGN)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (STA)
- John Watson - Facebook (JRW)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Long Ho - Dropbox (LHO)
- Mike McKenna - PayPal (MGM)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Jan Mühlemann - Locize (JMU)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts :

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

January 27, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda

- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/9)

### Introductions

### Process

### Presentations

RCA - We have planned two presentations for today, but probably we should postpone the NIC presentation for next WG Meeting.

JAM: [presents slides](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oJdW-vObyhgnOBVvotNqsXXfgmBl6hR5/view?usp=sharing)

### Open-Ended Discussion

RCA : Where did you find the numbers about the % preferences of users regarding the structure of translations

JAM: They’re are based in my own product and personal experience building applications

ZB: There is a big difference between whether a feature is used 0.5% or 7% of the time when considering how to design the syntax of the format. We found that when the syntax was made easier for more advanced features, more advanced features were used more often.

MGM: are using CLDR rules for plurals ?

JAM : Yeah they’re are CLDR based

MGM: how do you handle nesting and gender count ?

JAM : That work till certain degree , becomes a problem when you have a 2 gender in same sentence , I won't go further extending the library rather i will move to fluent or a future standard Message Format.

APS: Whatever formats we use should promote the correct behavior to support all the intricacies of various languages, and use CAT tools to support the translation.

NIC : I will cover this in the next session , not all TMS are equal. Having a syntax that doesn't depend on the tool would be good as a gold standard.

JRW: Really loud linters are helpful here. Telling them that they should be using a gender, etc. That catches a lot of bad use cases.

ZB: At MZ we use 3 levels of error reporting if you are running testing or other kind of build they will loudly complain about the errors , and in productions we don’t report any errors, helping developers find their errors

### Review Github Issue : Create and Collect Use Cases / Roadmap and Requirements

SFC : We must define the scope, we need to consider for each part of the pipeline we will start our design, if we are designing for developers, translators, or runtime efficiency.

APS: We have different user groups that we have to consider. For example, wanting to have complete thought strings as part of the structure. That's important for translators. I want to think about those things in defining a syntax. On the other hand, I don't want to dictate how companies' translation pipelines should work. That's a different thing.

LHO: I agree. Relevant though is the distribution pipeline. How resources get sent down to the client so that libraries can format it. Is it a string format that the API takes in? An AST?

NIC : We need to find a way where … they are 2 keys have syntax that helps in authoring and translation parts , not having any dependence on any internal tooling.

ECH: Syntax might imply a file format, so we should instead think more generally about a data model. Whatever language you're targeting can implement that accordingly.

MIH: In our design, we have to consider the syntax for the API different from the syntax we store in the files. That works very well in general. At Google we have support for plurals lite. It's implemented on top of MessageFormat, but the APIs don't look anything like MessageFormat. They don't have curly braces, etc. Separating the APIs from the string syntax itself would really help.

LHO: I agree. It sounds like we need a separate syntax for declaration versus runtime.

APS: I like that argument a lot. One thing I would argue is that for a JavaScript standard, at the end of the day, we need to specify what browsers consume. So we need to concern ourselves with that form, so we will eventually need to consider serialization, but it should be something that also works outside HTML.

RCA : we can probably move further with Syntax Part ?

MIH: look at the features that each framework do, and just list the features

LHO: spectrum ranges from simple tokenization like gettext vs embedded skeleton like ICU.

MIH [Slides](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oiKRfkuCuatT9k459nYwYw3neQ2Vm3rJ4toOu9wNwr4/edit?ts=5d83b891#heading=h.e93b6xgdq3qa) that i can present or share with you about likes and dislikes of message format

STA: I’ve been thinking that one of the features we have in fluent i would like to discuss and share is about nesting messages, In fluent we annotate the important words from the app and not reproduce all dictionary.

LHO: Can do a MVP w/o, then add later in v2?

MIH: We should have a wish list that groups all features for MF [Requirements](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/3)

RX : I would like to have an overview about whatever api we come up with, in presentations we spoke about capabilities but there's a lot of things to discuss about this topic , we should elaborate about the features of api.

RCA : As next steps we will start filling the wishlist of requirements to discuss and filter on the next meeting.
