#### July 20 Attendees:
- David Filip - ADAPT Centre @ Trinity College Dublin (DAF)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Pablo Velez - Expedia (PAV)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (SMY)
- Maria Esteban - Expedia (MNE)
- Pablo Velez - Expedia (PAV)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH) 
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Rafael Xavier de Souza - PayPal / OpenJSF (RXS)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)


## Next Meeting

August  17, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)


## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/97)

Easy way to volunteer to participate in Chair Group :  [Link](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/70)

We should go ahead and get started

### Moderator: David Filip 

## Pull Requests Status (10min)

RCA: first thing I want to share is the Chair Group meeting notes.  We should start closing and merging PRs.  First PR is the one by ECH is #80 on glossary and terms.
 
ECH: Yes, I agree it is useful since we will start discussing details in the proofs-of-concept soon.
 
RCA: Next one is Why Message Format needs a successor.
 
ZBI: I am okay with landing this, I have already reviewed it.
 
RCA: Let's close at end of meeting.  Next is #94 add examples of copy which requires variants (placeholders).
 
ZBI: One thing is that I want to hear from SMY about whether we want to support two independent selectors.
 
SMY: (chat) Yes please!
My understanding was that we start with something simple now
To have an excuse to discuss design principles
 
ZBI: I see SMY's comment.  I will try to address this during my presentation.
 
George: I had a question about independent selectors.  Ex: "The light is one" vs "The lights are on".  The whole sentence changes, there are 
 
ZBI: I will try to address this in my presentation.  The data model should encompass representing all that info.
 
RCA: Please let's start using the queue for questions.


## Concrete message format use case - Selectors / Placeholders POC (15min)

RCA: Lets timebox for 15 minutes before starting the proof of concept. But there’s a discussion in PR 97. Someone wants to share more details?
 
MIH: I have POC code that is public, but I have not yet sent the links to everyone. (chat) https://github.com/mihnita/msgfmt_experiments
 
RCA: If we have extra time after the two presentations, we can discuss it.
 
EAO: One thing. The fundamental questions: wrt. selectors, should we have a model for specific well-known selectros or flexibility to apply some sort of function to the input that chooses the selector. MF1 goes with the option of going with an explicit list, Fluent goes the other way of having a function. 
 
It allows the discussion to be far more flexible since we don't have to decide up-front all of the possibilities of available options.
 
DAF: We should move to Zibi’s presentation.
 
ECH: Not sure how much my presentation can answer EAO but maybe after it could be answered.
 
EAO: Let's move forward.


## Zibi's Experimental AST Overview (30min)

- *Repo*: https://github.com/zbraniecki/message-format-2.0-rs/tree/master
- *Slides*: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1nBnWv3nQQnS0zMkM5qsIE6f5zki3YDHXR-hdxJo1Pc0/edit?usp=sharing
 
ZBI: it's a fairly small presentation. It's intended to show you what we used when we designed Fluent and applied to the scope we are discussing now.  Will not address rationale in this presentation.  How this came about is a separate question.
 
Problem scope:
Took them from the goals of the project
Added one point: all data should be formatted explicitly or implicitly
 
Simplest AST:
Message with single value
It can later have metadata/other information
Pattern: vector of elements
Elements can be textual or placeholders
If textual is an expression
 
ZBI: Questions at the end
 
Handling variants:
Either single or multi variants
Variants composed of Variant and Key
Variants can be strings or numbers

Fluent does not try to limit the structure of the AST/data model, but we can discuss this later.
 
Two problems when designing; first:
If you have variants and a selector for these variants, you should be always find a value even if a matching variant cannot be found
Localization is a best effort, we should always return a value - no blanks
We should do everything possible to save message that could indicate to the user what could be done
We need a concept of default variant (fall-back)
In Fluent we added a default field in the variant, it seems natural place 
You could also use the last variant as the default
But how you encode this default is open question
 
Next question, is about how to handle multi selectors
In Fluent we handle this with multi- expressions
Currently, the expressions and variants can be nested
It's challenging to read a nested selected of multi-expressions
We don't want to allow every placeholder to be a part of the selection process.  That can lead to nested expressions
In option 2 multi selectors moved to the beginning of the message
All options are in Git, issue 6
 
So I think the main questions to answer are: default branches, multiple selectors, and uneven branches in multi-variants (?).

RCA: 10m left
 
ZBI: The question about uneven branching is something we should think about.  Maybe we decide that we don't want to support the granularity of preference for default selection when values are missing.  In fact, Fluent only supports one selector right now, and we are still successfully localizing all of Firefox, a large project.  So the question is how ambitious do we want to be with the model vs how simple? Questions?
 
SMY: (chat) Zibi, thank you for incorporating my feedback to the experiment you presented. I'd like to clarify that the Single/Multi split isn't how the actual Fluent AST is designed. I feel it's important to point it out as the question of whether the selection logic should happen outside or inside expressions has often come up in the recent discussions.
 
MIH: Clarifying question, one thing message format does is predefining plurals. If selector has value other, that's the default, no need for star. if you have multiple selector, it becomes messier. Internally we implemented option 3 and that's a pain in the… I'm advocating for option 2.
 
About the default, one benefit of a non-star approach is that in our localization tools translators can't add new variants. the tool would add these variants. For example, gender. In English you can use one ‘other’, same for plural. This is done by copying the value from ‘other’, then translators would work with ‘other’ to make it work for his/her language.
 
Having an explicit one helps tools processing, not humans. 
 
Where can we add these options?
 
ZBI: You can add those after ECH question.
 
RCA: Next is NIC. And we should extend this Q&A for 5m.
 
ECH: ok with 5 more minutes.
 
NIC: Related to MIH and how this would fit with a TMS. How do you know if a selector is missing in the tool? 
 
ZBI: We solved it with terms in one level. But the proposal here is that we are going to have all functions available to translators to have metadata with what you can pass and what it would return. This would allow any CAT/TMS to return the right value to translators. 
 
The variant model from Fluent has been tested in reality. But not yet the proposal about metadata.
 
RCA: Next is GWR.
 
GWR: My recommendation it can't be string literal, it should be formattable. So we would want to pass the actual numerical value, not just the string representation, because you may want to format differently (ex: compact decimal format).
 
ZBI: We would like to do this in the real world. Example with numeral fixer to correct decimals. And agree it shouldn't be a string but it should be formattable.   SFC and I are looking to pass FixedDecimal instead of just a primitive numerical type to get much better precision.  I'm trying to tap into what ECMA-402 is doing.  
 
GWR: Second part. If we are formatting a value, are we ok for it to have a string in spoken form in addition to the print form? 
 
ZBI: This is something not in scope in this experiment. We do it in Fluent,to have explicit forms for spoken and written. And this is a good follow up to this experiment.
 
RCA: We need to progress. Next topic is from SMY.
 
ZBI: SMY is on mute today. What I presented today is not how Fluent does it, but how I envision it.
 
ECH: I wonder if spoken vs. print can be handled via selectors/placeholders.
 
EAO: We are going to need this. When a human looks at a message like the one shown by ZBI, we need all the values for the nested config to make sense. But this is not good from a dev perspective.
 
ZBI: We do believe if we have a separate model for humans vs machines, we should optimize in a different way. 
 
SMY: doesn't see a strong case for numbers and literal decimals. (chat) Re. numbers, I think the case for having decimal literals is not very strong. Perhaps I haven't seen a use-case for them yet. All literals that I've seen used in Fluent were integers used as variant keys for exact matches. (Exact matches on decimals or floats can be problematic in some impls)
 
MIH: same as before about decimals. It doesn't work well if you allow the number of fractional digits to be decided by the developer.  This should be decided by the formatter, not the developer.
 
ZBI: Thank you for your time.


## Elango POC in Rust (30min)

- *Repo*: https://github.com/zbraniecki/message-format-2.0-rs/pull/8/files
- *Slides*: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1SYUNBoBtIxRnfvdAy8IXBXVQvUxdxIO4I6rquuO-zO0/edit#slide=id.g8c6a179f79_0_9

ECH: It's in PR 8 and diagram included in Google Docs.
 
I also have some diagrams with changes based on what ZBI has done. My message pattern resembles what ZBI presented.
 
Terminology is called a placeholder, in some cases it can be called an expression like in the Fluent presentation. For me a placeholder is something that holds on into some sort of content. Instead of having functions, I have types; example ‘PlaceholderTypes= Gender, plural’.
 
I put default values in text. The message base is what relates a single message with a message group. This relates to variants as we Fluent.
 
Something different, instead of a single selector or variant keys, I was trying to solve for a case when you have two independent selectors. I came with a Placeholder Values Map, which is composed of key values.
 
I used this Map as the actual key for all messages involved. This was my thing.
In the next iteration of the diagram (current + todo), the values map is not part of the message base but outside of it as a separate object.
 
Further changes (slide 3), messagebase is only holding to message pattern, we could get rid of it. The value map should contain any values at run time.
 
Code is included in the PR. Questions?
 
DAF: Reading question from SMY. How is this mapped to message base patterns?
 
ECH: Message base are templates. See example in line 489 in message groups, when count is equal to other, select this. You can see here multiple placeholder options. From 488 to 492.
 
MIH: Ids and locales, I don't think they belong at this level. Id is metadata level, like comments. And if you take the locale out, you would avoid great pain. If you take them out, the message pattern can be simplified. Its just a thought.
 
Is it really a message group like in Okapi? Or is just a selector group?
 
ECH: Agree, I need a better name for it.
 
NIC: Do you have examples of multiselectors?
 
ECH: I didn't have time to get to that. But I can update the PR with this later. But it should be straightforward, following option two from ZBI.
 
NIC: So multiple defaults approach?
 
ECH: Correct.
 
MIH: About the multiselectors, I posted in the chat something that can help and is missing in your presentation. We don't know in your example if this a plural or what.
 
ECH: Should you make a copy of the placeholders? Each of the patterns in the message map could have multiple placeholders. Maybe having a copy could be useful, but now I think its redundant. It make more sense if its part in the pattern and I wrote this as part of the code - see line 295 of my code.
 
MIH: No, you don't know this. From the placeholder you can't get all the deciding factors.
 
ECH: Agree, there’s room to extend the code to support this.
 
DAF: lets move to general questions.
 
ZBI: Thank you ECH and MIH comments are very useful. We have 3 possibilities:
In Data model we specify gender, plural, etc which closes the scope for localization features, makes the system more predictable
ECH model allows for more flexibility
Fluent treats all selector the same way, treating gender/plural as any other function
 
DAF: We need to move to next steps.
 
ZBI: Open versus closed is the most important question to decide in the next couple weeks.
 
DAF: This question seems the one to be decided. 
 
RCA: Please create issues in the repo with decisions pending and link them to your repo.
 
RCA: We are done. Everyone who raised a decision point, create an issue so it can be reviewed during the chair meeting.
