#### August 17 Attendees:

- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- David Filip - ADAPT Centre @ Trinity College Dublin (DAF)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Maria Esteban - Expedia (MNE)
- Shane F. Carr - Google (SFC)
- Rafael Xavier de Souza - PayPal / OpenJSF (RXS)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

September 21, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda

- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/108)

Easy way to volunteer to participate in Chair Group : [Link](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/70)

We should go ahead and get started

#Moderator : Mihai Nita

# Chair Group Announcements

## Moving calendar events to the Unicode calendar

## Task group within Chair Group

RCA: We are creating small groups to discuss specific issues, responsible for documenting discussion and results and report to monthly meeting. Ex: MIH ZBI ECH on their MFWG proofs-of-concept. Haven't decided yet how to represent tracking progress on a dashboard. How do people think? [signs of agreement] Most people in attendance were in the chair group, so no surprise.

# Presentation on MIH's proofs-of-concept for example problem (#93/#94)

MIH: Wanted to do something differently from ZBI and ECH who wrote implementations/proofs-of-concept in Rust. I have an implementation in Java using Protobuf and Java using JSON. I think in terms of the data model, it is similar is to ZBI's.

Data model diagram - there are placeholders that occur in the middle of messages. A placeholder consists of a name, type, and map of flags. I don't want to focus on the syntax of how I've represented placeholder examples, it's really just a reflection of the data model that I'm proposing. Flags are open-ended -- they might indicate: where to find the replacement text, information about grammatical parts of speech, sub-formatting patterns ("skeletons").

SelectorMessage - a message with multiple branches (ex: plural, gender). Consists of switches and cases. Switches declare the arguments used for selection. Cases indicate the possible branches (message patterns) from which a selection occurs. There is another field called "extras" at the SelectMessage level that

Notes on SelectorMessage: Doesn't address the open issues: 1) establishing the default case/branch/pattern 2) how is selection done? (ex: sub-question: what happens when 2+ case conditions are satisfied by the selection arg values?). Placeholder types are like interfaces/functions because they define how formatting should be done. Therefore, they are not "free for all" functions. Types and number of args should be defined ahead of time. But they should be extensible by the user.

Comparison with ZBI's presentation / proof-of-concept data model. Similar. ZBI's Expression corresponds to my placeholder. VariantCase corresponds to Case. InlineExpression corresponds to Switch.

I think the expressions are problematic.

ZBI: Can you explain why it's a problem?

MIH: I think recursivity is hard for people to wrap their heads around.

ZBI: InlineExpression cannot contain another expression. So there is no recursivity allowed. Fluent currently allows that recursive / nested use of expressions, but my presented proposal removed that aspect to address the simplicity concern.

MIH: Let me show you an example of a SelectorMessage in the Java+Protobuf code. I am using the example from the ICU MessageFormat documentation. My implementation works the same as ICU4J MessageFormat, as you can see the side-by-side test assertions in the unit tests.

I think we can make some faster progress by hammering out discussions in small group discussions, as opposed to short text blurbs here and there.

RCA: Before discussing, I agree with the idea of small task forces. I would like the people who take the initiative to take the effort and present. But I would like to emphasize that it is open and anyone is welcome to join and participate. But I think having people being more focused, through these task forces, would be helpful.

Action item here: who wants to join

EAO: I'm interested

GWR: I'm also interested.

RCA: EAO will you help organize?

EAO: Sure

RCA: Who will be a backup?

MIH: I can be a backup

EAO: If you are interested in joining, include your name in the minutes doc:

EAO
MIH
GWR
ECH (for note-taking)

RCA: Let's go to discussion using TCQ.

GWR: Can a selector have multiple grammemes (grammatical category values), like definite, plural and genitive? It seems that it could be difficult to represent multiple

MIH: I don't think the data model prevents us from doing that.

GWR: There will be a lot of grammatical info (ex: prepositions, articles). A lot of gramemes that we will want to combine, potentially. Not 1 or 2, but 3, 4, or 5.

RCA: (chat) could we have a test suite for these combinations ?

MIH: The slide on placeholders (slide #3) shows that you can have multiple arbitrary annotations.

GWR: What about multiple cases. "The light is on", "The lights are on", etc. Whether it's singular/plural, masculine/feminine, whether the word begins with a vowel, etc. Have you thought about how to handle it?

MIH: Yes, somewhat. You have plural, gender, cases, etc. But the issue is that some placeholders in one part of the sentence affect the decision in another part of the sentence, and they need to match/agree. That's why I think message patterns should be translated at the full sentence level.

GWR: What about issues like Hebrew where the message depends on more than one noun, it can take two nouns.

MIH: There is nothing stopping you from putting 5 gender selectors of however many you need. It might mean you have a lot of counting

RCA: MIH you are also discussing and moderator. We have a point of order to timebox this discussion.

ECH: What is the timebox?

EAO: 5 minutes.

GWR: About the gender labels male/female, I request that we use "masculine" and "feminine" to match CLDR. I recommend that we use RBNF from CLDR

ZBI: Do you want to support variables in placeholder arguments, and function calls on multiple variables? If you look at the slide #3 in your presentation, I want to look at the flags in a placeholder. In Fluent, an Expression allows you to have the type string, number, or another variable. That allows you to pass multiple arguments to a formatting function.

Do you think this is something we should not support, or have you just not considered it yet?

MIH: I haven't considered it yet. Not sure yet if we should or shouldn't support that.

RCA: Create a test suite. We should create a set of tests to support all of the functionality that we want. We should of course

GWR: I would love to do that. The question is, what is the syntax?

ECH: Could we encode examples similar to what SMY did in issue #94 to create examples that drove our proofs-of-concept work?

# Other topics

## Updates on proofs-of-concept

RCA: What is the status of proofs-of-concept work?

ECH: No progress since last time.

EAO: On this topic, there is issue #101, which is the draft sketch of another POC. If people would comment there, I would be interested in taking that forward.

MIH: I need more examples to help me parse this better.

ECH: I thought this proposal was compatible with previous proofs of concept. I think it goes into detail about

## Discussion on issue #103 Do we allow multiple multi-select messages to nest inside one another?

RCA: Can we discuss this further, there was some activity.

MIH: I think this is an example of something that is better discussed in smaller groups. But if we have extra time and people are interested, then we can discuss right now.

EAO: Let's talk about this for a bit.

RCA: Let's give this a 10 min timebox.

EAO: I don't think we can leave out concatenation from being a possibility. The language itself needs to make it possible. You can get so much more compression happening if you

MIH: Is the concern here data size? or the developer having to type too much?

EAO: All of it. There are some cases where it would help from having concatenation being possible, instead of being impossible.

MIH: I tried to give an example of selection in the middle of a placeholder vs. selection for the whole message. What I am arguing is that it is possible to convert between the two forms algorithmically. So we are not losing information either way. Yes there may be wasted space and clunkier for the developer, but it is equivalent.

I pointed out that lots of TMS / localization concerns only happen at the level of a full sentence, let alone being much less complex for professional translators.

EAO: The conversion is quadratic. And some use cases are not about professional translators and TMSes, only developers are involved.

MIH: Do we agree that we can convert between these 2 forms algorithmically?

EAO: Yes

MIH: Okay, that is core. I laid out 4 ways of representing this in syntax. We can choose how we balance between these two viewpoints of representation, but the nice point is that we can represent them the same way in memory according to the data model.

RCA: Any comments or recommendations?

MIH: Do we at least agree that all of these 4 options are equivalent?

EAO: I don't think they reduce the problem space in any way, because they cover the entire problem space.

MIH: I think they do, in a way, if we agree that they are equivalent, because it means that the data model is not wrong.

EAO: I think I addressed this in a comment somewhere else by saying that if we have a function that is free of side effects, no matter how many times it is called.

GWR: I think I understand, if you are converting a message with an article (it can be definite, indefinite), and then if you have a plural, the choice of article can affect the plural. But these choices need to be compatible (grammatically correct).

EAO: Yes, we need to make sure that there is no implicit state that we depend on when doing the conversion.

RXS: For what it is worth, it is not clear to me how EAO's point relates to the question at hand. For me, MIH's 4 options are clear, but it is not clear what EAO is describing.

EAO: Perhaps this discussion is besides the point.

RCA: I propose that we leave comments on the issue, since the outcome doesn't seem to be boolean in the way that I was thinking.

MIH: Well, maybe the outcome is boolean, but it requires more discussion.

ECH: I think this is an instance of the more generalized action of creating task forces based on topics.

## Discussion on issue #105 How do we support default case selection values in a multi-select message?

RCA: This issue seems resolved, no?

MIH: No, I think this is like one of those, where we need to discuss further. And this goes back to the design principles that SMY was rightfully wanting to think about. I think these principles will emerge after we discuss.

RCA: I think we agreed that we will discuss these things in parallel.

MIH: Yes, they are parallel and connected.

## Unicode Conference presentation

ECH: We are presenting. Uni Conf is actually happening. Oct 14-16. Currently MIH, ZBI, and ECH as speakers. But any suggestions or requests or feedback is welcome.

ZBI: The more we have to present, the more feedback we have from the audience.

GWR: I am presenting on Siri's message formatting system also at the upcoming Unicode Conference.

RCA: We can also do a checkpoint for people who are presenting to review their presentation progress.

# Sign ups for task forces:

ECH: How do we organize? Do we use email?

RCA: Since you're asking, can you?

ECH: Sure, I can take responsibility for organizing the small group. How do I send the message out to everyone who is interested?

RCA: We have the Slack channel, and I think most people are on it.

ECH: Not everyone is on the slack channel.

RCA: we can invite people to the Slack channel.

ECH: We still need email addresses to invite people to Slack. Please leave your email addresses if you are not on the Slack channel. We can add you to the Slack channel and/or organize over email -- however we decide is best.

MIH: I think we need some kind of prioritization. These are too many :-)

# Sign up for email addresses of anyone who isn't on the MFWG Slack:

## #98: Support variable info not in message patterns

MIH
NIC
RCA
SMY

## #99: Design Principle: Allow (or not) functions as data in data model?

MIH
NIC
RCA

## #101 Proposal: Use input mapping functions for case selection

EAO
MIH
NIC
RCA

## #103: Do we allow multiple multi-select messages to nest inside one another?

MIH
NIC
RCA
SMY

## #104: How do we handle and represent selection for a multi-select message?

EAO
MIH
GWR
NIC
ECH (for note-taking)
RCA
SMY

## #105: How do we support default case selection values in a multi-select message?

EAO
MIH
NIC
RCA
SMY

## #106: How do we support multiple selection args (selectors) in a multi-select message?

MIH
NIC
RCA
SMY

## #107: Can we treat selectors and placeholders similar somehow, or must they be distinct?

MIH
NIC
RCA
SMY

## #28 Bidi support in placeholders

MIH
NIC
RCA
