# Chair Group Meeting

### Agenda
 - Retrospective from last meeting 
     - Choose next meeting moderator
 - Review and share tasks related to chair group management  
     - Manage MFWG mail list
     - Agenda for Chair Group meetings
 - Define next meeting agenda
 - Review Backlog and open issues 
     - Label issues
 
### Actions
- Prepare a brief reminder on how to work with TCQ to shared before every meeting [#56](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/56)
- Prepare(@stasm) PR && Review PR for Goals and Non-Goals(Cont.) [#59](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/59)
- Try to find collaborators to take notes(Pablo will join use next meetings)
- Better Offline delegation or try to move things on Github
- Brainstorm and think about a better way in how to deal with label + track issues in our repository
- Schedule Chair Group Meetings
- We should start backlog review/clean up after the definition of goals and non-goals

## Decisions 
- Group decided in continue with only on chair-group meeting, that will take place the week after of the MFWG one.
- Next Meeting moderator @echeran

### Next Meeting Agenda 2020-05-18: 
- Goals and Non-Goals(Cont.)[#59](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/59)
- Why MessageFormat needs a successor[#49](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/49)
- Review Terminology [#80](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/80)
