#### December 16 Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Steven R. Loomis - IBM (SRL) - will need to stay on mute this time 
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF & Vincit (EAO)
- Robert Chu - Amazon.com (RCU)
- Mike McKenna - PayPal (MGM)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- John Watson - Facebook (JRW)
- Staś Małolepszy (SMY)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZB)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Rafael Xavier - PayPal (RX)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (SMY)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Long Ho - Dropbox (LHO)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts : 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

January 6, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/7)

### Introductions

### Process

SRL: Update from Unicode EMG today :  MessageFormat WG to be sub-WG of CLDR, with the goal of producing a UTS (Unicode Technical Specification), i.e. parallel to UTS#35 (CLDR’s LDML). There may be intermediate steps, for example it may start as a [Unicode Technical Note](https://www.unicode.org/notes/about-notes.html)  which has a lower bar for publication. But it can keep its number, so UTN#0000 can become UTS#0000.   

SFC: Unicode DFS based on 2-clause BSD. GitHub repo under unicode, etc.

SRL:  It’s an OSI approved license, SPDX Unicode-DFS-2016 https://spdx.org/licenses/Unicode-DFS-2016.html


### Presentations 

#### Staś Małolepszy (SMY) - Fluent

SMY: [presents slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1zgOzEDBIVMBoQPouK3BFQRI8f3kSmTXm4jtg3m889J8/edit?usp=sharing)

LHO: Can you talk about the experience on the translation side?  That's often a bottleneck for us, training new translators on the format, etc.

SMY: We focused on discoverability of syntax  every new format comes with some friction.  We're using our in-house CAT tool for translating FIrefox, which has some features specifically tailored to Fluent.  We also have a whole infrastructure of checkers and linters that verify the integrity of the bundles.  It's about allowing different syntaxes and then using linters and dashboards to nudge them to the best practice.

ZB: We also feel that we have a good number of opportunities because we are using our own format. There's a number of l10n-specific features we may add later.  One characteristic we found is that if you try to re-use some other format, like it's harder to encode.  Multiline is hard with JSON, for example.

#### John Watson (JRW) - FBT

JRW: [presents slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PvnBdVTOlU1-A2MdZhnT4AV7xdNbNjvesKr8x_qvIiY/edit?usp=sharing)

(The below wasn’t presented, just background for questions:)
[plural docs](https://facebookincubator.github.io/fbt/docs/plurals/)
[IUC 43 presentation](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1IsTa4tTn9WFfh62lz5aJyBwohIiK9R7i )

MGM: FBT question - can I use FBT constructs to choose gender of objects? (E.g. "table" vs "chair" have different gender articles in Spanish)

JRW: yeah so ideally, fbt.enum would be used here.
Something like `fbt('give me a', fbt.enum(['chair','table']))` would solve that particular case 'a' would cause  'la' or 'el'  as you'd get 2 full phrases extracted there for transliteration
We have been actively thinking about applying metadata/attributes to stand-alone fbt's, but it'd be a bit of work (so they could ... in theory... be passed as raw interpolations).


LHO: same question I have with Fluent, which is experience w/ the translators side. Also is there a bundling concept w/ fbt? E.g how do you do sharding of massive string packages (or if you don't) ? 

JRW: yeah so for the open-sourced FBT framework, we don't provide any baked-in solutions.  We have an internal  tool that our vendors access to provide variations (on gender/plural), etc.

Developers typically request strings directly off individual diffs (pull requests) they author with a widget we have on our internal "code review" tool.

Translations are often grouped by "project" internally both for "sharding" translation requests and simply providing context for a set of strings to be.
translated.  Like "oculus store" for instance

MIH: Dealing with the plurals, there's an attribute `showCount ifMany`.  How locale-aware is that?  I imagine the count could be before or after, alternate digits, etc.

JRW: I should be more clear on what translators see.  That string is generating only English.  The translator can do whatever they want at that point, move it around, etc.  No FBT enum, etc., shows up on the translator's side.  I'll add some more links to presentations and API docs.

NIB: Is it possible for the translator to add custom rules?  For example, if you want a `=0` in a certain message.  Can translators do that?

JRW: Translators can use the six CLDR buckets.  If you need `=0`, you need an if-else at the moment.

RX : for plurals how translators know what they are translating, do you have any special mark to contextualize what they are translating. 

JRW: Yeah, we have a tool… translators can specify metadata associated with a token in the tool.  So if a translator wants to explode/variate a token based on its number, they can.  Translators can then translate the entire outer string for the few case, many case, etc.  Variations are where the token decides the explosion for the outer string.

RX: So there is a binding between the metadata and the tool the translator uses?

JRW: Yeah.

SMY: It's interesting to see the hashing approach , is good to see how infra matches updated translations with updated source strings.

JRW: It's not a perfect solution.  Every time someone forgets a period, or a space, oh, that's now a new translation.  Maybe an AI should detect how close it is.  Regarding out-of-date translations, the hashes make that really clear.  We have fuzzy matching of translations, to load from previously translated strings, and people can approve those matches.  The fact that it's a totally different hash makes it really easy to detect an out-of-date translation, but in many ways it makes our lives harder.

#### Elango Cheran - MessageFormat

ECH: [presents slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YfH75BbAZB5mJ84El7I3tlWLZgTijU1fo0Y60eXSkIk/edit#slide=id.p)

MIH: To clarify, ECH's code is a proof of concept and not what we're currently using at Google.

### Open-Ended Discussion

SFC: To start the debate I see several differences between the presentations and they expose different opinions , runtime format, parse,  how do you feel about have unified format to coverall all of these situations

MIH: The benefit of having one format is, as a developer, you can write something and refresh your browser and see what's happening.  On the other side, if you have different formats, you can give the best format for each target audience.  For example, at runtime, I want something fast and small.  So I see benefits for both.  So in a way, I think separating the API that does the formatting, a "locale-aware printf", the string that you pass to that API could be completely separate from how I got it: JSON, whatever.  Having that flexibility seems useful, to separate things.

LHO: One inspiration coming from other Intl APIs is formatToParts.  Customizability that product teams look for is stylizing certain parts of the message.  I'm wondering whether we need a stylized AST format; for example, this is a number, this is a time, etc., so people can style them separately.

NIB: I made a syntax highlighter for ICU syntax.  Having a single syntax, including for linguists, seems useful because maybe translators want to customize more parts of the string besides plural.  But then the syntax also has to be something translators can understand.

ZB: When I've talked with MIH about fluent before, the idea is at the end of the day, you want a simple API call.  MIH was talking about this in the context of the fluent resource format.  The way to localize a button, etc., is a call in JavaScript.  So we should think about ways of localizing user interfaces that are not based on a call in the programming language.

ECH: We said before that we want to think about the DOM/HTML.  That's an important domain.  I don't know if this makes sense but I wonder if there's a line about what works for MessageFormat / ICU and a CAT tool, where you have a whole structure of text units, etc.  You can go off as much as you want into that.  ICU MessageFormat is not the easiest format for these tools, because translators like to see things in a list of source-destination strings.  So what's the line of where we go?

RCA: We're talking about two big aspects: the translators and the developers.  In my opinion we should have a tool built on top of the API to make it easier for translators.  I think we need to think a lot about scaling, which is important, but we should also think about the developer with a small page.

MIH: I would like that we have a standard mapping from whatever we come up with to XLIFF.  Because not everyone can build a whole l10n infra the way the big companies do.

SRL: +1.  We should consider mapping to XLIFF.  I'm on the XLIFF TC somewhat.  If we needed to make extensions to XLIFF, we could reach out to them.  But I think this should be a core consideration.

MIH: I have some open proposals to XLIFF.

JRW: XLIFF is the better GetText?

MIHL GetText is a format for developers, whereas XLIFF is the format for translators.  You make an XLIFF file to send to translators, and then you transform the XLIFF back to something usable at runtime.  We shouldn't make developers write XLIFF by hand.  Some tools support XLIFF well, some not.  So I'm seeing translator tools as their own entity, and they can have their own import/export filters.  You just have to make sure that the core stuff is powerful enough.

NIB: Support for XLIFF is not widely supported, probably due to its complexity.  We'd like to consider XLIFF again though.

SRL: Are you looking at XLIFF 2?  XLIFF can accommodate without shoehorning these things.  So there's opportunity.  We're making XLIFF central to all our processing.

RCU: When we get to gender handling, there's also the gender of nouns.  Translators should be able to provide information on the grammatical properties of those nouns.

MIH: If the noun is open-ended, it's hard to determine the gender at runtime.






