##### November 25 Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Addison Phillips - Amazon.com (APS)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZB)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Rafael Xavier - PayPal (RX)
- Mike McKenna @ PayPal (MMK)
- John Watson @ Facebook} (JWN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Mozilla (STA)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Long Ho - Dropbox (LHO)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF and Oracle (RGN)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts : 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

December 16, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

[Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=unicode.org_nubvqveeeol570uuu7kri513vc%40group.calendar.google.com)

## Requirements

RCA: Presenting
[MF 1-1 Meetings Slides ](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Rs29O3h56bS8SZx331AH8rDroH81GWHZko_JEAcTeR4/edit?usp=sharing)

### Requirements slide: New file format

APS: A problem I see with the select is that it is hard on the translators.

RCA: The issue here is the syntax to make it more flexible.

AP: "Flexible" isn't the word I would choose, but easier to author and translate would be good.  We maintain a system where we split the message apart and hide the curly syntax mess for translators.

MIH: Readability for translators and programmers is very different.

ZB: The interesting question about "a new file format" is a little more complicated.  We may need a different format for a different audience.  Every row below the first row requires a new file format.  But not every row needs a new file format to replace MessageFormat.

APS: What does "file format" mean to you?  To a certain extent it means I can put messages in a JSON file, or a new syntax.

RCA: What I meant with "file format" was a new file extension.  Fluent has one, for example.  I was asking if people want to write messages using a different extension.

APS: So we're talking about a resource file format, which may… I mean that's potentially a superset of just message formatting.

ZB: It's hard to think about them completely separately.  It was important that we think about the container for error handling.

APS: If we're doing this for ECMAScript, what is the authoring experience of that?  The question is how do people write resources, not just message formatting ones, but they don't like to write message formats differently than other resources.

### Requirements slide: Pluggable formatters

MIH: I have an example implementation.  It was easy to write.  In this area, MessageFormat and Fluent can do largely the same thing.  Mark Davis in the Unicode Conference proposed an interesting idea.  Come up with a data model and figure out what Fluent can represent and what MessageFormat can represent.

ZB: I don't expect any major differences.

APS: I agree.  It's straightforward; there's nothing mystical about doing this.  It's just a question about formalizing this.  If you did this at the ICU level, you'd have to deal with conflict resolution.

STA: When you say pluggable, do you mean by platform or by programmers?

MIH: By programmers.

STA: I would like to make sure this plugs into the "metadata" point below.  We've found in Mozilla that it might require a way to communicate to translators what these messages mean and what they do.

MIH: Yeah.  The more expressive we are to programmers, the messier it is to translators.  If you control your full stack, like Mozilla, that's fine, but for the public audience, they don't have full stack control of the translators.

### Requirements slide: HTML markup

ZB: A lot of mistakes programmers make in DIY localization is thinking about the order of arguments in the string.  You might have images, etc.  In Fluent we developed a service system of overlaying and re-translation not breaking things.  W3C has standardized arguments, etc.

MIH: I would recommend looking at the XLIF format.  They have open, close, and standalone placeholders; placeholders have flags like it's OK to overlap, clone, etc.  Those are the kinds of concepts that I think would help for tag.

STA: There are two key use cases we've identified.  First, when we use HTML, we want to interpolate that into a full sentence.  Second, when markup is part of the localization, like italics.  These are different because they require different runtime semantics.  I think it needs different allowances for syntax.  For example, it would be nice to use angle brackets in translations.

JWN: I wanted to specifically mention that FBT looks like you're creating HTML markup, but there's a transpiler happening behind the scenes before it makes it to the user.  The way we've been making with bolds and spans is we've been using auto-interpolation that the transpiler abstracts away from you so that the programmer doesn't have to think about it.  For simple cases it works just fine.  In general I would like to see the API facing the engineer, abstracting it away from them.  It would be nice if they could write markup and have something in-between what they see and the translator sees.  We should specify what we mean when we say "markup".

### Requirements slide: Cross-platform

APS: I agree.  Something portable that works in Java, C for native platforms, etc., is really important.

MMK: +1

APS: I'd like to add that if we have a common format, translators and so forth will get used to it, which is beneficial, because then the industry can target something.  We have a lot of experience with translators not being familiar with Java/ICU MessageFormat, even at this late date.

(RCA continues presentation)

### Requirements slide: Translator / Developer UX / DX

APS: Managing locale fallback hierarchy…

ZB: There are 2 levels.  There could be a regional difference (partial microtranslations), so es-CL translates a few strings differently than es, and then generate a selector that generates the formality level.  So a different product could use a formal language, or informal language, for the same message.  So those two levels of variant selectors, by locale and by formality…

APS: So, within a locale, having different modalities.

MIH: The biggest challenge in localization tools and translation memories, etc., is handling end-to-end mapping.  So in English, if you have a message with one level of formality, and you want that translated to 3 different messages of formality in Japanese, you break a lot of different tools.  Plural is a similar concept.

### End or requirements slide

RCA: Any other thoughts before the next slide?

MIH: I think we should decouple the message syntax from the file format.  I can store it in JSON, database, etc., and I can do a lot of things with it if I'm not tied to a file format: serialization versus runtime.

APS: So we're trying to figure out scope.

RX: Fallback is something I would like to include as a key requirement.

APS: I think that goes to what MIH said.  If what we're defining is the MessageFormat syntax, we are talking about how you write your messages in your program.  But if we're designing a file format, we have to figure out the things that go with that syntax.  I won't put words in people's mouth, but Fluent has found one set of restrictions you can do if you combine the two.  I think there is room for more design if you can bring different file formats to the floor.

## Working Group Organization

RCA: I would like to shoot that we could match the same week as 402, on Mondays.

Works for me: APS, MIH, RX, ECH, SFC

RCA: For the format: I think 90 minutes is good because it's not so long, but let me know if it's okay with you.

APS: 90 minutes is a bit long for me; so, not more.

STA: I hope most of the discussions happen offline on GitHub or other fora.

SFC: I think 90 minutes is fine if we know the agenda ahead of time and we don't have to use the full slot.

RCA: Should we record the meeting in video?

APS: I find minutes are more useful.

SFC: I'm happy to be the scribe; having a second scribe would be good, too.

RCA: About the backlog.  How should we handle this collaboration?

SFC: We should make a repo for discussions.

RCA: How about subtasks?

SFC: We're already a subgroup.  I don't think we should extend the hierarchy unless we find that we need it.

## Roadmap

RCA: The next meeting would be 9 December.

SFC: We can tentatively put that on the calendar, but we should be clear about what progress we can make before then.

## Backlog Creation: MessageFormat

RCA: I would like to figure out what we should focus on based on what we discussed today.

STA: The key decision to debate first would be single file format versus decoupling the file format.

RCA: I will create issues on the repository for this backlog.

MIH: I wanted to propose that if it's possible to share documents that you accumulated during the 1:1 phase of the project?  You mentioned already prototypes created by different people.  Sharing what you have already.

RCA: Yeah, I'll try to get permission from everyone before sharing the docs.

SFC: We should set up a GSuite folder to share docs.  It could be in either chromium.org or unicode.org.

APS: I think the key decision, like STA said, is whether we're building a file format or an API.

SFC: It might be good to have a proposal that we can mutate.

MIH: The elephant in the room is, is this Fluent 2.0 or MessageFormat 2.0?  Until we decide if we go this or that way, it would be difficult to come up with a decent strawman.  I think we all agree, structurally, they are very similar, but the syntax is pretty different.

STA: I think it's important that we talk about this openly.  I'm thankful for everyone who learned more about fluent.  I think this working group has the opportunity to select scope with precision and start with something smaller.  I think we're excited about everyone's participating, and like we shouldn't just do Fluent, because it does many other things as well.  Syntax has a tendency to be an inflammatory topic sometimes.  I took part in coming up with Fluent’s syntax, and it's been a draining process.  It's amazing that this is taking place and it would be a pity to start by talking about syntax.  We should think about whether to do file format, as well as use cases for the API.  I think this is an opportunity to not repeat the mistakes that we might have made.  I come here as someone who wants to build MessageFormat 2.0.

SFC: We should start with an MVP, and you're right, we should know what we're trying to build first.

ZB: It's hard to think about JavaScript localization without thinking about HTML.  It's about the web stack.  How do you localize a paragraph or a menu item?  In JavaScript, you have a function that you call, and inject it into HTML.  In HTML, you have an identifier that's associated with localization resources.  It's useful to say if we're trying to design a localization system for the web, or exclusively for JavaScript, and expect that the W3C will do something different for HTML.

ECH: It would be useful for us to know the technical issues that Fluent had to solve.

SFC: Would be useful for ZB to share slides about Fluent, and also fo rhte champions of the other existing frameworks to share slides, so that everyone can get up to speed on these various different options.

SFC: We should think about decouping the data representation from the web-specific use cases.  We want to eventually build something that can also be used in Android, etc.

APS: If JavaScript could just render ICU MessageFormat, that would solve a lot of problems.  The ability to build messages and format them, and get things out of CLDR data that we can, that's important to me, and then adding on Amazon-special sauce is good.

LHO: Having more mechanisms to extract CLDR data out of the browser is more important.  The parser for MessageFormat in react-intl is just a few kilobytes, tiny compared to the data that it needs.

RCA: Next meeting, we should have a timebox to just share about the existing frameworks, pros and cons.

LHO: Are we going to involve localization professionals in these talks?

RCA: I'll try to get some, but it's not easy to involve them.

APS: I intend to include someone from our enterprise localization team.

MIH: I can bring some of that also; I worked for 7 years on the vendor side as a l10n engineer, and on the client side I worked on the l10n tooling for Netflix and a couple of years at Google.

SFC: We should build an MVP and then we can circulate it more widely.  We don't necessarily want to get too many cooks in the kitchen.



## Documentation / Links 

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oiKRfkuCuatT9k459nYwYw3neQ2Vm3rJ4toOu9wNwr4/edit?usp=sharing

https://github.com/echeran/clj-icu4j -> walkthrough;  examples;  impl code

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Rs29O3h56bS8SZx331AH8rDroH81GWHZko_JEAcTeR4/edit?usp=sharing

Fluent 1.0 slides from Unicode Conference: https://www.unicodeconference.org/presentations-42/S12T3-Braniecki.pdf


## Backlog

 - Resource Format vs Message Format
 - Understand Consequences of deficions and analyze how API’s should be used 
 - Collect Use Cases
 - Open Requirements List
 - MVP Roadmap



