## Executive summary ([Original Doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QvzmpbVsPfW0MFajXGIqPhXxp54oGV6xaVShOjaV-qk/edit#))

*Participants:*
- DAF: David Filip
- ECH: Elango Cheran
- MIH: Mihai Nita
- RCA: Romulo Cintra
- STA: Stanislaw Malolepszy
- EAO: Eemeli Aro
- ZIB: Zbigniew Braniecki
- LHS: Luke Swartz
- NIC: Nicolas Bouvrette
- GRH: George Rhoten
- CLS: Colin Sprague

Consensus 1: Include message references in the data model.

Discussion: The implementers would find a way to include references anyways, but including it in the data model (standard) can make it subject to best practices.  It’s still possible for users to do “the wrong thing” (ex: concatenation of strings/messages), but then you would find it more difficult to achieve.

One of the drawbacks of message references is that referenced messages effectively have a public API (names of parameters, variables, variants, etc.) which must be consistent across all callsites. This leads us to  consensus 2.

Consensus 2: Allow parameters passed with message references to the message being referenced and validate it.

Discussion: The variables/fields passed should not be completely untyped and unchecked.  We want a validation mechanism that can allow providing early error feedback to the translators & developers.  We need to decide on when the validation can & should happen, including the meaning of “build time” and “run time” in regards to validation. 

> Approval Stamps for Executive Summary

*ECH,MIH,RCA,NIC,DAF,STA,EAO,CLS*

## Minutes

LHS: Summary of last meeting (2020-10-19 monthly meeting).  Continuation of previous discussions, but closer to a compromise.  One side would prefer to keep all selectors external to the message.  The other side would prefer to allow selectors inside / internal to the message.  Argument for external selectors is simplicity of data model, and compatibility with existing l10n tooling.  Argument for internal selectors is that it allows for more flexibility in the future.  It makes a more compact notation (for cases where compactness matters).  And it makes it easier for translators who are programmers.  It allows for the possibility of lossless round tripping.  EAO was suggesting a compromise that we either allow message references or internal selectors, and it seems like MIH and others were OK with this…?

MIH: Message references are about using a message id that points to an external selector, but not including the message itself.  So it’s “message-by-reference”, not “message-by-value”.

ZIB: For message references, there would need to be tooling made to support it, but it can be done.  But one advantage is that they can be used  dynamically.  That is a powerful model that we don’t support in Fluent but would like to explore support of.  If they solve what EAO is looking for, then that is great.

LHS: One thing to point out is that MIH said last time that allowing message references means that users can concatenate messages, but we recognized that no matter what we do, it’s always possible for users to “do the wrong thing”.

ZIB: And we can use linters to help users detect potential problems.

MIH: And if we don’t allow programmers to do this, then it will be “behind our backs”, but if we let people do references in the standard, then we can catch it, advise, etc.

RCA: It’s nice to have guidelines to help the user, but it’s a cool-to-have or nice-to-have feature, but it’s good to 

EAO: I’m not sure that linters are outside the scope [of the WG].  It is something that could be included in the spec.

RCA: I think we can specify best practices, but it is good to not interfere in the 

EAO: I suspect that if we delve deeper into this topic, that it would be more complicated than we realize.

DAF: It’s true that we don’t have specific guidelines on the external user deliverables, but we do have a specific goal on interoperability with XLIFF, and that might surface 

STA: I want to acknowledge the shortcomings from Fluent regarding message references.  The first drawback is that message references means that you reference messages.  People tend to abuse it.  They put nouns into message reference and then use it as a reference instead of just using the noun directly in the pattern.  The second problem is that there is a loss of context for the translator.  The third problem is that a single message is no longer independent. That means that you need a CAT tool to find out what these other messages are / where to find them, and then you need to construct a graph of message dependencies.

DAF: STA, you’re right, but MIH is also right -- if you don’t gie this option, then they will do this anyways, so this gives the user some guidance on what to do.  XLIFF can represent this with subflows. You’re right there might be subflows of logic, and there can be business logic around that.  And this is a continuation of the discussion on the thread about “localization units”.

EAO: If our current discussion is about where to put the message references in the data model, then later discussions can determine how to layer in how to use it, but we haven’t finished the first discussion.

LHS: One thing that I wanted to makes sure is that companies/groups that want to use internal selectors, that there is a mechanism to convert to external selectors losslessly, and that companies/groups that want to keep things simpler (e.g. due to STA’s concerns) could just not allow references at the company/group level (even though it’s allowed in the data model/standard)

ZIB: What I was talking about last time was exploration about extensions, using metadata, that gives us the ability to turn on features using flags and maintain that information.  

EAO: It’s nice to have consensus on this topic of , which I am seeing here.

RCA: Can we ask for consensus, here?

STA: I have my doubts about them, and I’m less enthusiastic about them, but it’s really easy to work around them, and if you do, it’s even worse.  It’s not perfect, but all the alternatives are worse.

MIH: I agree with all the concerns that STA has, too.

STA: I was enthusiastic about the features that message references enable, as GRH showed with Siri, so there is a lot synergy there, and I’m not going to block it.

RCA: Does this decision about message references imply anything about internal selectors?

MIH: They’re different.

LHS: But can we talk about not having internal selectors if we use message references?

MIH: ZIB, is it okay to share info from our 1-on-1 meeting earlier today?  We are cautiously optimistic that there is a way to work with this without needing to use internal selectors. 

ZIB: I will write up a summary of our meeting and post it as a GH issue.

EAO: The (external) message that is being referenced by another message should be able to have access to some variable representing the context of the message that uses the reference.

MIH: Is this example correct?  “I am visiting {city_name}” and the translator wants to know, when translating the message that {city_name} points to, that it is a dative or locative case.

STA: One thing about genders and casing was that developers define the messages with cases, etc., and once they do, they’ve created a sort of public API for the messages, whether they realize it or not.

GRH: Are you talking about the nomenclature for the grammatical keys, etc.

STA: For example, someone might call it genitive, but in Polish, I may not call it genitive.

GRH: Linguists come in and define it, but over time we’ve improved after we realize that we want to standardize the names of terms.

MIH: A proposal: we don’t put it in the standard, but instead we create a registry like what Unicode does for locale identifiers (BCP 47) that uses IANA for a registry.  With a clear expectation that it is subject to change.

STA: That is something that we were thinking about, too.  Maybe on a per-application basis.

NIC: We had discussions on Github about special file formats for references.  Is that necessary for references?

MIH: I think that it can be designed to be file-format agnostic.

EAO: My feeling is that we should be able to provide _a_ file format that can support all of the features that we want to support, but not declaring it to be _the_ file format.

LHS: Like a reference implementation?

EAO: Yes.  I think YAML is the only one that does ______.  But I don’t think we should talk about file formats right now.

DAF: Going back to the topic of registry.  We have quite a lot of things already that would benefit from a registry. Maybe a repo for all of them? General linguistics define many of the grammatical concepts that map to variants of messages. But we also have to think about where the repo goes, who maintains it, etc.?  Would Unicode be maintaining it? For XLIFF, we have a place where we allow people to register their own custom values so that they don’t just go off and do things opaquely.

MIH: XLIFF 2 has a model that defines standard ways to add extensions
http://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/xliff-core/v2.1/os/xliff-core-v2.1-os.html#extensions

DAF: also it is a good idea to reserve some authority for ourselves and make clear where people can register their own sets of values and for what under their own authority..

EAO: This overlaps with the discussion of references (?) and we need a registry for that.

DAF: We are talking about one registry, but maybe we need more than one.  For example, a registry of variants per language is a different kind of information than an inter-language registry of general linguistic categories  Unicode CLDR acts as registry for several external specs such as BCP 47 extensions U and T.. We also have to start thinking about where to place the registry technically and politically.

EAO: What we do not know yet is whether these registries will have 100 entries or 1000 entries, and these sorts of matters will shape the discussions of who owns that registry and how does it operate.

RCA: Before going too far into topics of registries, etc., should we first resolve the discussion of message references, and get a consensus.

STA: Anyone -- is there any sustained opposition to MessageFormat 2.0 having references, with details TBD?

RCA: We seem to have consensus.

DAF: We should bring this up in the monthly meeting. Only there can we make decisions. The consensus here is still helpful for the taskforce. 

ZIB: I would like to see the [Apache voting system](https://www.apache.org/foundation/voting.html) to make it quick and clear, from -1.0 to 1.0.  It helps see the temperature on the discussion and not a difficult binary system.

RCA: We should still have the official vote in our monthly meeting, based on our rules.

DAF: But maybe we can quickly vote 


Apache style Voting on including message references in data model:

```
EAO: +1
ZBI: +1
CLS: +0.9
NIC: +0.9
LHS: +0.5
DAF: +0.9
RCA: +1
MIH: +0.9
ECH: +0.9
STA: +0.5
```

ZIB: Thanks, this was much more useful to me than just silence.

DAF: Zoom does have a polling mechanism built in that I use in other groups that I chair, and it has worked well.

RCA: Should we count?

ZIB: It looks good, everything is fairly strongly positive with a low standard deviation.

RCA: We should have someone bring this to the plenary meeting to describe the discussion and the consensus and temperature reading mechanism using Apache voting.  Can someone do that?

MIH: I can.

EAO: I think there is a possibility to go a step further to have these message references allow the passing of context from the message with a reference to the message being referred to.

RCA: I see this as an extension of the message reference itself.

MIH: It kind of is.

EAO: I would like us to consider the proposal and get consensus for the ability to pass context in the message reference.  If we do, then we can call for consensus on not allowing internal selectors.

MIH: We could take a look at the metadata that we tie to the references, but we should not connect it to the topic of internal selectors.

RCA: Can we have an example that illustrates this topic?

MIH: a need for metadata for message references
Example: `You visited {$company} headquarters`
It is useful to allow a translator to add some extra info to the ref, for example the fact that it should use a locative grammatical case.


EAO: STA, can you formulate a statement that you would be willing to support?

STA: That might be too much to do right now.

ZIB: MIH and I would like to ask you all for a couple of days so that we can share our discussed proposal.

STA: I think I would like to make my support of message references more qualified by saying that I would prefer them to be strongly typed.

MIH: What does that mean?

STA: In the Fluent example below, `$case`, nominative, genitive are the de facto public API of brand-name. I’d like message reference to protect (on build time) against mismatches between definitions (brand-name) and callsites (about).

```
brand-name = { $case ->
  [nominative] Brand
  [genitive] Brand’s
}

about = About {brand-name($case: “genitive”)}
```

EAO: What you’re saying is that you want a build-time error if the name `$case` is not an option, then it throws an error.

MIH: Isn’t this something that can be handled for the registry.

EAO: That _a_ possible implementation, but what I am looking for is a consensus for the idea of a strongly typed reference.

MIH: Okay, I wouldn’t call that “strongly typed”, but it should be defined in the registry.

ZIB: Another way of thinking about it is having some form of meta information that defines which selectors/keys and/or values provided to them that are passed to the message that is being referenced.  But we still allow companies/groups to define their own selector types.

DAF: We need 3 levels: things in the standard, things in the registry, and things in the control of the code owners.  That’s basically defining extension points that say what we additionally accept and where.

We need to define extension points.

MIH: Yes, XLIFF 1.2 defines so many extension points that tool makers extend it every which way to the point where they are incompatible.

DAF: we need to be clear that the private extensions must not compete for functionality with the standard or the registry when adding their own private values.

CLS: Another simple example: 

```
color-ball = "You picked the {$color} ball."
color-toy = "You picked the {$color} toy."
```

Spanish:

```
red = {type: Color::Adjective, masculine-singular: rojo, feminine-singular: roja, ... }
color-ball = "Escojiste la pelota {$color : feminine-singular}."
color-toy = "Escojiste el juguete {$color : masculine-singular}."
```

MIH: maybe

```
color-toy = "Escojiste el juguete {$color, { grammatical-gender: masculine, grammatical-plural: singular} }."
```

`$`  in front of color means reference (Fluent style), but it is not a proposed syntax, just to exemplify.

STA: Message references create an implicit API, and what I’m trying to solve is preventing someone from breaking this API.


RCA: Should we bring this to the plenary and discuss there?

EAO: Let’s do the Apache voting on this topic.

Voting on allowing meta-information passed with message references to the message being referenced and having build time validation (see discussion above):

```
EAO: +1
ZBI: +0.8
CLS: +0.8 (as long as it has standardized category names)
NIC: +0.9 (as long as its generic and extensible)
LHS: +0.5
DAF: +0.9 (as long as the validation is integral and enforced)
RCA: +0.9
MIH: +0.9
ECH: +0.9
STA: +0.9 (with validation)
```

EAO: Also, the type of variable being passed (via a message reference to the referenced message) could be numeric.

LHS: What’s the strawman argument against this?

EAO: Maybe this means that the messages are authored more verbosely.

MIH: Or that we pass this information freeform.

EAO: And we support the inherent complexity of the problem via build time checking. (Might just add verbosity...actually will reduce complexity.)

STA: One thing that is not a con, but a cost, is that we are instilling English vocabulary on grammatical terms.

MIH: Our standard can specify what fields should be included in the meta information passed with message references, but it doesn’t need to specify what happens if the user does not specify all required fields.

DAF: we can force compliance with standard and registry and put a SHOULD for private values

ZIB: Is there a general consensus that the tools give the users an option on whether to fail or proceed when validation fails?

STA: This is represented in one of the design principle Github issues, and there’s a spectrum of positions on the topic.

ECH: I think that could be an implementation detail, but I agree that it’s nice to have, and implementers giving users that option between warning and failing would be nice.

NIC: How will linguists handle variables that are managed in registries, especially for big datasets? Are we expecting them to have access to variable values during translations and if so, I presume we would expect TMSes to implement this new standard for this to work?

MIH: Yes…  The metadata stays the same no matter how big the dataset is. Things like grammatical case / gender / number don’t depend on how many items we apply them to. But 

STA: If we make this lenient and the parameters don’t match at runtime, then it would be useful for the parent message to know that the parameters don’t match.

MIH: An example I had was `hello {$username}`, and in Polish the case of the `$username` changes to vocative, but what happens when there is no vocative form of the name available?  Can the translator have a default option that doesn’t use the placeholder altogether?

DAF: I agree, we need an exception payload 

EAO: Do we need the referenced messages to return not only the value (string, array, etc) but also the case/variant that was chosen, so that the referencing message has a chance to react?

STA: There needs to be 2-way communication, I agree EAO.

EAO: Given the mini-consensus that the task force has come to on these topics, I would be okay in not allowing internal selectors in MF 2.0.

RCA: We can bring these issues to the next plenary meeting.  I would like to ask for another volunteer to bring this issue about characterizing metainformation passed with a message reference.

MIH: Let’s summarize our discussion.

LHS: Also, ZIB and MIH had a discussion that they want to share the notes for.

ZIB: Yes, I have the notes written up.

MIH: So we’ll move fast, but let’s summarize what we have right here.

RCA: MIH, do you want to have another task force meeting on this?

MIH: For message references + metadata, we can take it to the plenary meeting without further discussion.  Not yet for internal selectors.

RCA : We should define the terminology of build time & runtime, here is the place [#126](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/126)