# 15 April 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

Scribe: MIH

## Topic: Tech Preview

LDML45-Tech-Preview branch and release created

APP: Branch created, LDML45
We can continue working on main.
Post-preview work: plan and schedule. Will try to have a proposal for next time.

## Topic: Planning for v46 work
We have much to do…

## Topic: PR Review
Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.

|  PR  |                      Description                     |              Recommendation             |
|:----:|:----------------------------------------------------:|:---------------------------------------:|
| #769 | Add test:number and test:plural function definitions | Discuss                                 |
| #768 | Provide link to MDN for options and their values     | Discuss                                 |
| #767 | Add new test schema                                  | Discuss                                 |
| #765 | Linkify the specification                            | Merge (non-normative)                   |
| #757 | Tech Preview Blog Post                               | Merge                                   |
| #755 | [DESIGN] Effect of selectors on placeholders         | Discuss                                 |
| #754 | [DESIGN] Bidi usability                              | Merge                                   |
| #753 | Add design doc on function composition               | LDML46                                  |
| #744 | Fix design doc                                       | Merge (approved, waiting on bearfriend) |
| #743 | Collapse all escape sequence rules into one          | LDML46                                  |
| #728 | Add "resolved values" section to formatting          | LDML46                                  |
| #704 | Address #703: make syntax/data model fallback clear  | LDML46                                  |
| #673 | Fix whitespace conformance to match UAX31            | LDML46                                  |
| #646 | Update spec as if PR #645 were accepted              | LDML46                                  |
| #645 | Add design doc for dataflow for composability        | LDML46                                  |
| #634 | Design doc to capture registry maintenance           | LDML46                                  |
| #584 | Add new terms to glossary                            | LDML46                                  |
| #558 | Add <when> to help select the right <match>          | LDML46                                  |


### 765: script to linkify the spec

AAP: Thanks to Eemeli
Merged.

### 754: [DESIGN] Bidi usability

EAO: my mental model is that this is going to be use exclusively by tools
Would be good to know how various editors handle these markers.

APP: I confirm that this is most commonly for tooling.
Using string directional markers are there for the messages to render properly, but these markers don’t show in code, selector, etc.

MIH: talking about cat tools, most will extract the text from around the placeholders. May impact text editors, and review tools

EAO: are still many cat tools that are not browser based?

MIH: yes

MIH: there are still a lot of problems in browser based tools. Browser based does not mean bidi is handled properly.

### Testing

APP: Thanks Mat for the schema (Add new test schema #767)
And EAO (Add test:number and test:plural function definitions #769)

EAO: My PR is not to test the number result, but that the implementation predictably produces digit 1 and one. Testing selection, not exact result.
Same, we want to test behavior for correct / incorrect values for options (min/max Fractional, etc.)

So not to test :number, but that the implementation does the right thing for complicated options.

APP: we can create special tests for these.
But also good to provide the ability for apps to test the behavior of the standard registry.
For that we expect to be able to describe the existing result we expect.
Any application would also test that the exact string is correct.

EAO: Follow-up after the 2 PRs landed
Expected value can be specified in several ways. MF, or calling with the real formatting.

APP: what i would suggest is to rename things to avoid confusion.
Like test-number-selection.

MIH: added some comments to the PR. don’t have to depend on the formatter. Don’t test against real CLDR data. Maybe a regex, e.g. `*Mar*2024*` not test exact results. Was in my feedback.
Basically tests that the implementation passes the proper params to the underlying formatter, and are honored.

### PR 767: Add new test schema #767

EAO: how do we version the schema?
So that we don’t get locked in.

But we can also version the paths, so that we can make changes later.

MRR: my thinking was the latter (path).

EAO: do we support BOTH “exp” and “error” at the same time.

MRR: yes, both.

EAO: we should not make the expected string mandatory.

MIH: we need to be able to tell if something failed, even if we don’t specify the exact errors, or exp string.
We have (had some weeks ago?) a file with input only, and all expected to fail, but the only indication of the fact that they fail was the file name.

MRR: comment from MIH: split into sub-groups

MRR: will land “as is” and reiterate.

### Provide a link to MDN for options and their values #768

APP: Squash and merge

---

EAO: would appreciate if we aim for an in person meeting in Anaheim (TPAC, 23-27 September)

APP: walk in that meeting “close to done”

APP: stake down for a face-to-face


