# 16 September 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED) (first 30 min)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Harmit Goswami \- Mozilla (HGO)  
- Matt Radbourne \- Bloomberg (MRR)  
- Elango Cheran \- Google (ECH)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)


  
**Scribe:** MRR


## [**Agenda**](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki#agenda)

**Next week: cancel call because TPAC and LDML46 spec beta?**

##  Topic: Info Share

Addison: [https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/3\#issuecomment-2350218930](https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/3#issuecomment-2350218930) 

You may want to look at the comments I’ve made. I’ve made them without my chair hat on. I’d appreciate others looking at them.

EAO: The JS implementation has a PR open. Then it will be up to date with the current state of the spec.  
Second thing: I’v’m talking at the Unicode Tech Workshop about message resources.

APP: I think you and I will tag team.

MED: Myself and Elango (ECH) will be there so we can meet some of you in person.

## Topic: LDML46 Final Touches

*\_Let’s make sure we address open issues for LDML46 and reach consensus of what is included in our milestone Tech Preview release.\_*

- Syntax freeze?  
- Add a note about renaming the function registry or should we change it now? See [https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/maintaining-registry.md](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/maintaining-registry.md)  
- Composition

APP: One of the open PRs has changes to whitespace and bi-di. I don’t know how much churn that would introduce for implementers. We’re getting close to behaving as if we have a syntax freeze. We’ll want to discuss what syntax freezes we have in 46\.

APP: We did agree that we’d get rid of the idea of a function registry. The section is still called “Registry” so we either want to fast-track some renaming of this or provide some explanatory text.

MED: Leaving a note is perfectly fine. Section headings and things can change before the .1 release.  
If a note is easy and there’s a lot of stuff piled up, a note is fine.

APP: I’ll fast-track a note and will be looking for approvals on that.

APP: The other thing is function composition. We have a rough consensus but the devil is in the detail and we’re not going to do this for 46\. Do we want to say something in 46 about ‘this is the shape of what we’re doing’.

MED: We don’t need to prematurely signal where we might be going until it’s really solid.

APP: There is a note in there.

EAO: It would be good to know if TIM will be participating in this discussion.

APP: Yes, but not at this moment,

APP: If we don’t agree to merge it today, it’s not going into 46\. EAO, I saw you raised a PR with a typo, we can fast-track that,

MED: Typos can come in afterwards. Clear obvious small changes.

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#885 | [Address name and literal equality](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/885) | Discuss |
| \#884 | [Add bidi support and address UAX31/UTS55 requirements](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/884)  | Discuss |
| \#882 | [Specify `bad-option` for bad digit size option values](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/882)  | Merge |
| \#869 | [Add section on Uniqueness and Equality](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/869) | Competes with \#885 |
| \#859 | \[DESIGN\] Number selection design refinements | Merge (Proposed) |
| \#846 | Add Unicode Registry definition | Discuss (\#634) |
|  \#842 | Match numbers numerically | Discuss (Reject) |
| \#823 | Define function composition for :number and :integer values | Discuss |
| \#814 | Define function composition for date/time values | Discuss |
| \#806 | DESIGN: Add alternative designs to the design doc on function composition | Discuss |
| \#799 | Unify input and local declarations in model | Discuss |
| \#798 | Define function composition for :string values | Discuss |
| \#728 | Add "resolved values" section to formatting | Blocked by \#806 and \#798 |
| \#673 | Fix whitespace conformance to match UAX31 | Discuss |
| \#646 | Update spec as if PR \#645 were accepted | Discuss |
| \#584 | Add new terms to glossary | Discuss |

## Topic: String Equality (#885, #869)

*Addison proposed changes to address string equality. There is one controversial detail: whether literals require NFC for equality or not.*

APP: \#885 I don’t think theres any disagreement around name equality.  
The only place where our spec does literal matching is with key values.  
Literals themselves are not constrained \- they’re just strings.  
The question is \- do we want to require a key comparison to be done under NFC or roco\[?\] points?

EAO: I don’t think we need to address this but we can: Are the keys normalized?  
We _need_ to define equality for key lists.

APP: We don’t have to require implementations to do any normalization.  
If we do equality, we have to do NFC on the values or at least check that they aren’t normalized.

MED: I think EAO is right that we separate these two items \- you generate a ‘duplicate key’ error if the key list is equal according to canonical \[?\]. Secondly, whether or not this is done before we pass a literal to a function or we leave it up to the functions.

EAO: My preference is to allow normalization before, but use as if normalized.

MIH: Do we want to leave the freedom to functions? I don’t find good use cases but it’s a custom function so it can do what it wants.

APP: I agree with that. If we say we don’t normalize and then allow option values or operands. If denormalization works only some of the time, that’s cognitively tricky, versus saying ‘we’re not going to normalize these for you.

```  
.local $angstromsAreCool = {Å :string}
.match $angstromsAreCool
Å {{U+212B is the only way to be cool}}
Å {{I'm U+00C5, so almost cool}}
Å {{I'm A + U+030A, so I combine with cool}}
* {{I'm not cool}}  
```  
We’re not going to _stop_ you normalizing your data.

MED: The implementation load is minimal for normalizing literals.  
I think it’s far far more likely that people will have errors because of denormalized text rather than them wanting to do something with denormalized text. If we want this feature, we can think of a syntax but I don’t see a need.

EAO: I would be fine with us handling key values differently from literal values because they feel syntax-y from a user point-of-view. When thinking about implementation and the requirement of match selector keys returning exact inputs. If I want to enable normalization to happen with my custom matching function, it becomes weird (e.g. hanging on to original values, comparison on normalized but return unnormalized values.) My \_key\_ point here is that we can define behaviour for keys separately from what we define for literals elsewhere in the spec.

APP: I agree. Since we require key list uniqueness. Having a note about not requiring keys to be normalized. I can imagine lots of places where I want to do use a denormalized string as an operand. It behaves like text and we know how to handle text. For the operations that we control, saying this makes sense.

MED: I’d prefer to not jump on this for literals before release. I think this takes a little more thought.

APP: They already can be. What we’re saying is that the function will get whatever is there. We should clarify key equality and key comparison.

MED: Requiring the comparison to be canonically equivalent (normalizing NFC) is good. I think normalizing before passing to selector. I certainly would want to make it possible to do. It’s a tricky subject.

\[MED leaves\]

MIH: I think if they are passed normalized then they should be returned normalized.

EAO: We should do the same with option names. They’re compared as NFC but their values are not NFC. At the point of passing to a custom function, we don’t have any language saying what will happen. The normalizations should correspond with each other.

ECH: \+1 to the idea that they are canonically equivalent.

EAO: Happy to leave further consideration until later.

APP: So implementations should normalize key names? I’m cool with that. Do we want to require a name to be NFC?

EAO: Again, we should not talk about ’name’ in general, but with option names. We have the same non-duplication. We end up passing the option name uncanonicalized. If what we’re doing with option names and key values and attribute values would all match each other. If we talk about those specifically and not ‘names’ it would help.

ECH: It's an interesting discussion but I'm not sure if we need to enforce people to provide things in NFC composed form. I think it’s good for checking equality. When it comes to function option names, checking for duplicates is useful. I think you just need to know what the contract is with the function. Maybe also we can revisit this and not worry for the time being.

APP: It’s not so much that people are going to use denormalized latin script, it’s that they’ll use the domain things in their own language. When we say comparisons are done (see note in PR) and the name is not normalized, we treat them as equal so you can’t have the same names. In practice most people are going to choose rational values (things that don’t change because of encoding etc.). I’ve seen plenty of code written in different languages (e.g. variable names in Russian).

MIH: I would be inclined to really normalize the names as if they were equal. In ICU, I think I put them in a map. If there’s a requirement to pass the real thing, it’s just weird. I can’t think of a good use case where people really care about this.

EAO: I agree with MIH. I think we ought to normalize the string values of keys, option names and attribute names. I don’t know that we need to normalize anything else. Anything else can be normalized with a function, but this can be a later discussion. As a side node, I believe MF2 will lead us to localize our variable names. In this sort of use with Finnish, it made more sense for me to use Finnish variable names.

APP: We would like all of our comparisons to be under normalization.  
Permit literals that are not compared internally.  
We think we might impose NFC on identifier name in future but not in 46\. Is that a fair summary? Can I make changes to the PR?

EAO: I support that. I’m not hearing objections to requiring the normalization with keys, option names and attribute names. We could do that in 46 or later.

APP: I will not merge today.

## Topic: Whitespace Handling (\#884, \#847)

*This pull request implements the design discussion from \#811 (“bidi-usability.md” design) and addresses UAX31/UTS55 requirements. Discuss merging.*

APP: This implements the loose part of the bi-di design. It also changes whitespace handling \- as a result, it replaces S-production with an O-production for required whitespace. There’s text in the spec to deal with UAX requirements which are not a material change. The biggest kicker is to allow some of the bi-di markers into the syntax outside of text.

EAO: I think I approved this PR.

APP: You did.  
Re. syntax stabilization, I’d like to say this is pretty close to the people who are tracking our progress. It makes a lot of very small changes to the optionality of whitespace (removing some square brackets).

EAO: I propose we merge.

APP: Any objection?

TIM: There’s no spec tests, since there are a fair amount of changes being made to the ABNF.

APP: I agree \- there are spec changes. The tests would need to be updated to have a bunch of the bi-di controls.

EAO: Could we add the tests as a separate further change.

TIM: Fine with me.

APP: Any objection to merging this? I see none. I see some agreement. \[Merged\]

APP: Anything else on whitespace.

EAO: Track issue for tests. Separately, adding the recommended text “if you’re emitting message format 2, this is how you should be doing the bi-di output. Like with the data model, we could have a recommended part \- “these are instructions that you should be following but we’re not requiring you to do so.

## 882

EAO: For boolean values that expect “true” and get a different literal string value, we’d expect them to behave the same as digit size options.

APP: We have a task to specify additional places for this option. I’m going to squash and merge this one.

MIH: I can’t find any boolean type of thing. \[Merged\]

## Topic: Number Selection (#859, #842, #823)

_Let’s resolve how number selection is described. We have some PRs loosely coupled to this, notably the design doc in 859 and @eemeli’s proposal to use number value selection in 842._

APP: \#859 is a change to the design document based on comments by EAO around matching numerically. It changes the status of the design from ‘approved’ back to ‘proposed’. Does anyone mind if we merge, knowing that we’ve captured this in the design document.

EAO: We could iterate on the PR with the changes. Reopening is fine with me as well. I’d prefer using a different term than ‘proposed’ like ‘reopened’ to indicate that it might have a more colorful history.

APP: I’ll do that. Do we want to talk about number selection today?

EAO: I’d be happy to talk about that.

APP: Current state is that we currently say something about using a serialization of a number as the thing that gets compared. EAO’s proposal is to change it to actual numeric comparison.

EAO: The two really viable options:  
Do the selection, ignoring all of the options on :number, because different implementations will understand the options differently (e.g. rounding \- we don’t define how that happens). I think the only really reasonable we to get consistent bahaviour is to ignore all options.  
Or leave as-is but clarify that exact value selection is implementation-defined.  
I’m not aware of other satisfactory options.

MIH: I’d be happy to introduce something that looks like a numeric type that can be platform-specific. What we have now is just for exact keys, which are relatively rarely used.

APP: 0 and 1 are used a lot.

MIH: I’ve never seen an exact key that looks like an arbitrary precision. If somebody needs something like that, it’s a custom function. It’s easy to say that the values in this function are strings. It’s something that we can add to the plural later on. If we discover it’s not enough, number can also accept the arbitrary precision value.

APP: I would urge people to read through the long thread on \#842. E.g. in plurals, having fraction digits selects a different value. I would want our key definition to be as clear as we can make it. And that certain kinds of matching may have idiosyncrasies. I think there are corner cases where people want to do integer matching. Occasionally fractional values get matched \- the most memorable example for me: 0.00 gets turned into ‘free’ when you have a currency value. We shouldn’t make it impossible but maybe we don’t have to specify all of the rounding etc. that EAO mentions. We’ll conflict with different programming languages.

MIH: With plural $1 vs $1.00, it’s not about exact values. You really make it a number and apply the rules from CLDR. You make it a number anyway. It’s true that we care about the decimals for plural selection but not for exact match.We’re not blocking ourselves and can bring it back when people need it. If we treat everything as strings, people have to parse a string to a number. Libraries for MF2 should implement string \-\> number, which feels very clunky.

APP: Where are we at? I don’t think we want to merge EAO’s proposal today. Our current wording attempts to solve this problem in a specific way but it doesn’t sound like we’re happy with it. It doesn’t sound like we’re going to fix this in 46\.

EAO: I can imagine custom functions desiring 0.00 to indicate how formatting should happen. If it’s parsed as a numerical value, this information is lost. Behaving differently if it’s quoted vs not quoted, it’s weird.

MIH: foo=|=0.00|  
I would argue that, if somebody needs to make that distinction they can use quotes, etc.  
If people want a string, they should treat it as a string.  
I can have the options in JSON and we’re back to where we started \- I cannot convert to JSON.

EAO: An option value of 1.3, everyone agrees on “1.3” but I can think of three different distinct numeric values of this. I think that we’d be imposing a high cost by requiring this within MF2.

MIH:  
```
options" : {  
   "maxFractionalDigits": 1.00  
}
```
\=\> this parses as a 1 (number)

APP: we just disallowed that earlier in the call  
I think the damage is limited to exact match keys. If we can contain it \[to this\] it’s easier. In either case, we don’t have text to merge today. I think a change can be made to the integer text to propose changes.

EAO: What might be achievable is seeking consensus on whether comparison should be implementation-dependent.

MIH: I would not merge this as-is. We argued that precision is going to screw you over. Either we care about precision or we don’t care about precision.

APP: I disagree with actual numeric comparison. I think MED and I are coming from a similar place \- the number you are going to format later is what you are going to compare. EAO, you called out gaps in the current text. I don’t think it’s perfect. For 46, we could put in a note that we’re studying this problem and that comments are welcome. I don’t think we’ve solved it yet.

EAO: Do we have consensus on it being implementation-defined?

APP: I _might_. I think we should have clear guidance for authors. It wouldn’t be implementation-dependent and it would enhance portability. I would be open to introduce implementation-defined stuff. We could say, e.g. floating-point is somewhat implementation-defined. I would prefer if we could define it well and define the boundaries.

MIH: Considering we have a code-freeze in 3 days, we should leave it as implementation-defined.

APP: It’s not defined as that now,

EAO: It’s currently implicitly implementation-defined. I don’t remember the exact text but it’s leaving wiggle-room for the implementers. Going from a number to its JSON representation, there’s not one JSON number representation that can be used. APP, you might need to write the write proposal text. I an welcome to be shown I am wrong but someone else will need to propose text.

APP: In 45, we proposed only integer matching is required:  
“Only integer matching is required in the Technical Preview. Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based selection would be helpful. Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.”

EAO: Might be good to review if the note satisfies some of the conditions we’ve mentioned here.  
E.g.  1234 \-\> 12.34 or 12.00 in JSON

APP: I’ll propose text for 46 that clarifies our note. I think we could fast-track that.

EAO: It sounds like none of the function composition stuff is going to be merged for 46\.

APP: That’s accurate. Although I believe we’re now near consensus of what we’re going to do. Am I hearing that we want to sit on :string for the time being.

MIH: I think that last time we reached a generic way to do compositions. Without being 100% sure that those are bringing us closer to what we decided last week, I’d rather not do this now.

EAO: The two tasks for function composition are in-line with what we talked about last week. In addition, we’ll still need to define how this stuff works for the functions that we define.

APP: I think you guys are in violent agreement but not on timing.

MIH: Timing and order. Since we didn’t fully agree on the generic rule in writing. We can’t say that we agree.

EAO: We have pretty exact language in the notes from last week but can be returned to later.

APP: We’re going to skip next week. I’ll use the email list and GitHub to communicate as we go through the 46 stuff. It’ll be effectively what we’ve merged now plus the fat-tracked items discussed in the call, then we’ll resume in 2 weeks.

EAO: The skip next week is for W3C TPAC.

APP: Fighting a good fight, but with a different hat\!


## Topic: Issue review**  
[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 50 open (was 56 last time).

* 14 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 3 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 2 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion.  
* None are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#865 | TC39-TG2 would like to see completion of the TG5 study | Discuss |
| \#847 | [Conformance with UAX \#31 & UTS \#55](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/847) | Discuss |
|  |  |  |


## Topic: Design Status Review

| Doc | Description | Status |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| bidi-usability | Manage bidi isolation | Accepted |
| dataflow-composability | Data Flow for Composable Functions | Proposed |
| function-composition-part-1 | Function Composition | Proposed |
| maintaining-registry | Maintaining the function registry | Proposed,Discuss |
| number-selection | Define how selection on numbers happens | Revision Proposed, Discuss |
| selection-declaration | Define what  effect (if any) the annotation of a selector has on subsequence placeholders | Proposed, Discuss (Agenda+) |
| beauty-contest | Choose between   syntax options | Obsolete |
| selection-matching-options | Selection Matching Options (ballot) | Obsolete |
| syntax-exploration-2 | Balloting of the   revised syntax used in the Tech Preview | Obsolete |
| variants | A collection of   message examples which require a branching logic to handle grammatical   variations | Obsolete   |
| formatted-parts | Define how   format-to-parts works | Rejected |
| quoted-literals | Document the   rationale for including quoted literals in MF and for choosing the | as the   quote symbol | Accepted |
| builtin-registry-capabilities | Tech Preview   default registry definition | Accepted |
| code-mode-introducer | Choose the   pattern for complex messages | Accepted |
| data-driven-tests | Capture the planned approach for the test suite | Accepted |
| default-registry-and-mf1-compatibility | Default Registry and MF1 Compatibility | Accepted |
| delimiting-variant-patterns | Delimiting of Patterns in Complex Messages (Ballot) | Accepted |
| error-handling | Decide whether and what implementations do after a runtime error | Accepted |
| exact-match-selector-options | Choose the name for the “exact match” selector function (this is \`:string\`) | Accepted |
| expression-attributes | Define how attributes may be attached to expressions | Accepted |
| open-close-placeholders | Describe the use   cases and requirements for placeholders that enclose parts of a pattern | Accepted |
| overriding-extending-namespacing | Defines how   externally-authored functions can appear in a message; how externally   authored options can appear; and effect of namespacing | Accepted |
| pattern-exterior-whitespace | Specify how   whitespace inside of a pattern   (at the start/end) works | Accepted |
| string-selection-formatting | Define how   selection and formatting of string values takes place. | Accepted |
| variable-mutability | Describe how   variables are named and how externally passed variables and internally   defined variables interact | Accepted |

## Topic: AOB?

—

Chat stuff:

You  
9:34 AM  
[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zofxbu8PdxEpHbRVA1EtHnbPyrmEAPv4\_jqjFL4hx5o/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zofxbu8PdxEpHbRVA1EtHnbPyrmEAPv4_jqjFL4hx5o/edit?authuser=2)  
*keep*Pinned  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
9:36 AM  
ICU has code freeze Sept 19\. So what's in by then, that's it (implementation wise)  
Elango Cheran  
9:51 AM  
FYI to those new to Unicode string normalization: [https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html](https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html)  
You  
10:05 AM  
\> \[\!NOTE\] \> Implementations are not required to normalize \_names\_. \> Comparisons of \_name\_ values only need be done "as-if" normalization \> has occured. \> Since most text in the wild is already in NFC \> and since checking for NFC is fast and efficient, \> implementations can often substitute checking for actually applying normalization \> to \_name\_ values.  
Elango Cheran  
10:09 AM  
French and German have combining marks (umlaut, cedilla, accent, etc.)  
You  
10:09 AM  
... but nobody types them denormalized  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:20 AM  
\> ... but nobody types them denormalized Vietnamese might type them denormalized  
The Windows Vietnamese code page is denormalized. And legacy keyboards produced that form. I don't know if they are still widely used or not.  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:38 AM  
foo=|=0.00|  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:41 AM  
"options" : { "maxFractionalDigits": 1.00 } \=\> this parses as a 1 (number)  
You  
10:41 AM  
we just disallowed that earlier in the call  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:43 AM  
I am not asking for treating quoted / not-quoted numbers differently \!  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:47 AM  
\> we just disallowed that earlier in the call What I'm saying is that the example I show is json And it is parsed as a number by the json parser. Which does not care about what we disallowed or not  
You  
10:49 AM  
Only integer matching is required in the Technical Preview. Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based selection would be helpful. Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.  
^ is a note  
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță  
10:57 AM  
\> French and German have combining marks (umlaut, cedilla, accent, etc.) Yes. But nobody types them in decomposed form. Vienamese does (some older keyboards)  
MessageFormat Working Group teleconference  
