# 14 October 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

###  Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) -chair  
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)  
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)  
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)  
- Mark Davis - Google (MED)

  
**Scribe:** MIH


To request that the chair add an *issue* to the agenda, add the label `Agenda+` To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

## [**Agenda**](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki#agenda)

To request that the chair add an *issue* to the agenda, add the label `Agenda+` To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

##  Topic: Info Share

(none)

##  Topic: Schedule for Release

(none)

##  Topic: `resolve-candidate`

*The following issues are proposed for resolve:*  
797  
786  
752  
703

## ** Topic: Agenda+ Topics**

###  Bag of options vs. semantic skeletons

### 

###  Topic: Allow surrogates in content

*The previous consensus was to allow unpaired surrogate code points in text but not in literal or other constructs. Mihai points out some issues with this.*

MIH: My initial understanding was that we should allow this in localizable text, and literals are localizable text

###  Topic: Add alternative designs to the design doc on function composition

*This topic should take only a minute. The discussion here is whether to merge PR 806, marking the design as “obsolete” or just close the PR.*

### : Topic: 799/786 Possible simplification of the data model/unify input/local definitions

***This was homework for this week.** The PR proposes to unify local and input declarations in the data model. We should accept or reject this proposal.*

###  Topic: 603 We should not require \* if the variant keys exhaust all possibilities

*We should review this proposal and categorically accept or reject it for 46.1*

## ** Topic: PR Review**

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 906 | Allow surrogates in content | Discuss, Agenda+ |
| 905 | Apply NFC normalization during :string key comparison | Merge |
| 904 | Add tests for changes due to 885 (name/literal equality) | Merge |
| 903 | Fix fallback value definition and use | Discuss |
| 902 | Add tests for changes due to bidi/whitespace | Merge |
| 901 | Clarify note about eager vs. lazy evaluation | Discuss |
| 859 | \[DESIGN\] Number selection design refinements | Discuss |
| 846 | Add u: options namespace | Discuss (634) |
|  842 | Match numbers numerically | Discuss (Reject) |
| 814 | Define function composition for date/time values | Discuss |
| 806 | DESIGN: Add alternative designs to the design doc on function composition | Merge as Obsolete, Agenda+ |
| 799 | Unify input and local declarations in model | Discuss (for 14 Oct) |
| 798 | Define function composition for :string values | Discuss |
| 584 | Add new terms to glossary | Discuss |

##  Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 46 open (was 48 last time).

* 3 are (late for) LDML46  
* 15 are for 46.1  
* 11 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 4 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 3 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion.  
* None are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

## ** Topic: Design Status Review**

| Doc | Description | Status |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| bidi-usability | Manage bidi isolation | Accepted |
| dataflow-composability | Data Flow for Composable Functions | Proposed |
| function-composition-part-1 | Function Composition | Proposed |
| maintaining-registry | Maintaining the function registry | Proposed,Discuss |
| number-selection | Define how selection on numbers happens | Revision Proposed, Discuss |
| selection-declaration | Define what  effect (if any) the annotation of a selector has on subsequence placeholders | Proposed, Discuss (Agenda+) |
| beauty-contest | Choose between   syntax options | Obsolete |
| selection-matching-options | Selection Matching Options (ballot) | Obsolete |
| syntax-exploration-2 | Balloting of the   revised syntax used in the Tech Preview | Obsolete |
| variants | A collection of   message examples which require a branching logic to handle grammatical   variations | Obsolete   |
| formatted-parts | Define how   format-to-parts works | Rejected |
| quoted-literals | Document the   rationale for including quoted literals in MF and for choosing the | as the   quote symbol | Accepted |
| builtin-registry-capabilities | Tech Preview   default registry definition | Accepted |
| code-mode-introducer | Choose the   pattern for complex messages | Accepted |
| data-driven-tests | Capture the planned approach for the test suite | Accepted |
| default-registry-and-mf1-compatibility | Default Registry and MF1 Compatibility | Accepted |
| delimiting-variant-patterns | Delimiting of Patterns in Complex Messages (Ballot) | Accepted |
| error-handling | Decide whether and what implementations do after a runtime error | Accepted |
| exact-match-selector-options | Choose the name for the “exact match” selector function (this is `:string`) | Accepted |
| expression-attributes | Define how attributes may be attached to expressions | Accepted |
| open-close-placeholders | Describe the use   cases and requirements for placeholders that enclose parts of a pattern | Accepted |
| overriding-extending-namespacing | Defines how   externally-authored functions can appear in a message; how externally   authored options can appear; and effect of namespacing | Accepted |
| pattern-exterior-whitespace | Specify how   whitespace inside of a pattern   (at the start/end) works | Accepted |
| string-selection-formatting | Define how   selection and formatting of string values takes place. | Accepted |
| variable-mutability | Describe how   variables are named and how externally passed variables and internally   defined variables interact | Accepted |

## ** Topic: AOB?**

EAO: I will probably not be available in the next two meetings

###  Make bag of options for `` `:date` `` and `` `:time` `` optional in wait for semantic skeletons

MED: do we go out with nothing, or with an interim

EAO: can we have some time with these non-required, and make them required later

APP: we are talking about required options. Non required means you can still implement them.

APP: we decided early on to go with a bag of options because they can go back and forth to string skeletons. They are equivalent.

APP: what are we going to do with semantic skeletons they they come?

APP: we can’t really ship only with date / time style. We can’t say we are complete without something more flexible.

MED: I feel strongly that semantic skeletons are where we want to go.  
The current skeletons / bag of options would be a migration path.  
We can make them optional for now, and that gives us freedom to make them required, or keep them optional forever.

APP: but we do them as a package. If you implement, we implement all.

APP: anything else you are interested on in the agenda

###  603 We should not require \* if the variant keys exhaust all possibilities

MED: touching on the star, the issue of not requiring it means that things are not that robust.  
Messages build without a star you get into problems. It is kind of ugly to mix `\*` and `other`, but it is more robust.

EAO: the other case is the booleans. If you define true / false you will have nothing else ever.

APP: you need to know how to “explode” the cases.

MED: I think that we can back away from it if we require selectors to identify a default value.  
So at least the default value should be there.  
But has the downside that implementations need to know about all the selectors.

MIH: you mentioned we discussed it. Thought we reached a decision. Mentioning booleans. Seems like they have only two values, but some languages, like java, can have a null there. Localization tools have to know the functions. No way for tools to know without machine readable registry for now. 

MED: eventually we need a machine readable registry.

MIH: for a while we don’t have it.

EAO: how an implementation communicates about custom functions is the language server work.  
When we have a selector like `:boolean` if there is a `{$x :boolean}`, if `$x` is not provided then the selection fails.

APP: probably best we can do.

EAO: with `\*` the selection would use that.

APP: in the end plural will be a pointer to CLDR  
Other selectors will likely behave the same.  
Machine readability needs to be able to include a “hey, look there”

MED: a lot of tools will take the messages in a source language, expand, translated, then compact.  
So in theory it can compact to `\* \* \*`.  
The star makes the tooling much more reliable.

APP: this is also a thing we can examine in the tech preview. We asked, we had no feedback.  
This can be tightened in the future, if we need to.  
We have a proposal on the table.

EAO: we can’t loosen it in the future.

APP: this is a data model. It is checked before we do function resolution.  
Which makes it tricky.

MED: requiring it is backward compatible. If we relax it in the future, the old messages are still valid.

EAO: I wanted to note that it looks like the proposal is rejected. Maybe for future consideration.

APP: any other topics you want to touch.

###  797 Create a PR for function interaction

Can I close this? Objections.

###  786 Possible simplification of the data model

APP: Find to resolve?

###  752 Improve test coverage for built-in function options 

TIM: fin to close it?

###  793 Recommend not escaping all the things

TIM: no objections to close it

###  905 Apply NFC normalization during :string key comparison 905

   
APP: Closing, approved by MED, TIM, APP

###  904 Add tests for changes due to 885 (name/literal equality)

APP: EAO approved, I have some minor comments

EAO: I left a comment.

###  902 Tests for bidi and whitespace

APP: EAO an me already approved. Comments?

###  806 DESIGN: Add alternative designs to the design doc on function composition

APP: we already did a lot of that work  
Do we want to merge?  
Some good work here. I can merge but mark it as obsolete.

###  895 Allowing surrogates

APP: there are areas that are localizable.  
One of the examples was with text in a placeholder.  
I tend to agree that the first pass through UTF-8 will break shoes characters.

APP: the proposal as you make it means we can use one in a key.

EAO: can I jump into this?  
Bad tooling can make mistakes in the text. Bot in literals.

APP: I tend to agree. If MF2 implementation would break in unpaired surrogates it might be a feature.

MIH: I don’t see a difference between text and localizable literals.  
If a tool is bad then it is bad in both.

TIM: for implementation I didn’t know what the correct behavior is when we find invalid surrogates.

APP: is the proposal to allow unpaired surrogates everywhere?

MIH: no, only in localizable text

EAO: is NFC well defined for unpaired surrogates?

APP: yes

RGN: I am 90% confident it normalizes to replacement character.

APP: I checked, NFC normalizes as itself

EAO: when you update this make sure to change all mentions of code units, to code points.

EAO: will you include a warning to not use unpaired surrogates?

MIH: yes

###  814 Define function composition for date/time values

EAO: can we merge that?

APP: that is not permanent? Is it a solution for now?

EAO: it allows us to change later.

APP: I think we will be back here when we get to semantic skeletons

MIH: we are introducing a strong type system, even when the underlying programming language does not do that. We basically say that ``:date`` returns a date kind of type, and it is an error to feed that into ``:time``, because it is a bad type. 

###  799, 786 Unify input and local declarations in data model / \[FEEDBACK\] Possible simplification of the data model

MIH: Long discussion, unfortunately I was involved in it an didn’t manage to take notes.  
But the final decision was to drop it

APP: drop  
