# 12 February 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Simon Clark (SCA)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: MIH

## Topic: Action Item Review

## Info Share

EAO : summary on the ECMAScript. Data model: OK, syntax: NO
No choice but to remove the syntax.

EAO: explained the stages in ECMAScript proposals
https://www.proposals.es/stages

- Inactive (Withdrawn)
- Stage 0 (Strawperson)
- Stage 1 (Proposal)
- Stage 2 (Draft)
- Stage 3 (Candidate)
- Stage 4 (Finished)

Benefits of model without syntax: DOM localization, declarative L10N.
Might also add syntax parsing through WAG(?) / W3C.

EAO: need to talk about data model stability policy, hope today.

APP: model deliverable in this release (LDML 45)
One can write a full implementation with a parser without a data model.


## Topic: Progressing to Done

The main blockers appear to be the following:
- ~~Beautification of the syntax discussion~~
- ~~What’s in a name? (Does NCName fix our woes? Go to UAX31? what?)~~
- ~~Quoting~~
- ~~Format-to-Parts~~
- ~~Spannables~~
- ~~Expression Attributes~~
- Registry and default functions
- Implementation and testing


Schedule:
1. No new LDML45 issues after 15 January.
2. All LDML45 issues resolved by end of F2F. Balloting alpha spec to occur 15 February.
3. Beta spec and registry by 11 March.
4. Can make limited changes thereafter, for issues discovered by implementers.
5. Release 10 April as part of LDML45

## Topic: Data Model (#633, #632)
_Given choices in the Intl.MessageFormat space, we should pay reasonable attention to ensuring the data model describes “formatted messages” in an appropriate way. However, since the data model is non-normative, this seems like a task best suited for the Tech Preview period. Let’s discuss how much attention to give this in the current release._

EAO: discussion on aliasing: PR# 570 - are we keeping or dropping the aliases. 

APP- not currently refer to or implemented as aliases. We should decide what goes in as basic functions.

APP - https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/570#issuecomment-1859252553 . thinks it should be possible to get just date or just time without reverting to a bag of options.

STA - may be a good ergonomics improvement. Saving keystrokes is not a good reason to increase API surface area. 

APP- good usability improvement that thinks people will appreciate. MF1 has date (all purpose) and time (rarely used)

STA - instinct is to test hypothesis that people want it. Release without it and see if people complain. 

EAO - would be fine with tweak - datetime, date, and time sounds fine. Useful and ergonomic. 

APP - step back from EAO’s PR, not in right form. Follow APP’s integer/number description in number PR. Ultimately name does not matter, but we should have the discussion of what options to allow and disallow in each case. 

MIH - don’t want to repeat MF1. if you call date, then time options are disallowed. Cannot force it to show a time

STA - concerned we create a slight diversion from what we consider canonical. Datetime has datestyle and timesyle options. Time should not have a timestyle option, it should just be style. Introduces risk of future collision, or inconsistency.  We are coupling ourselves to ECMA standards. If we are not going to change option names, then that is maybe ok.Worried about introducing style that is contextual. 

MIH - “{$foo :time year:numeric month:full}” - get empty string? Error? 

MIH - I’ve seen developers using “{...date…}, {...time…}” in MF1, hard-coding the order of the fields, and the separator between them. Sure, it’s localizable, but what translators will do will not work for all locales (think languages used in a lot of countries, but translated only once, like fr, es, ar, en) 

APP - proposal: write a date/time formatting doc. Include date and time for now as separate things. We can debate once the PR is open.

EAO - current PR has style= options, does not allow year, month, etc.


## PR reviews

### 620 [Make declarations array optional in data model](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/620)

EAO: Intl.MessageFormat will probably want the array to be optional, so we should try to not diverge.
Also about future extensions. What we add in time will likely be optional. And it will be weird if some things are optional and some don’t.

APP: it is a bit of a tramp, as our data model is “built” from the syntax.

EAO: our data model allows adding new things to it
We can add to the pattern something other than expression / markup
Declarations: input, local, we can imagine adding something else.
TC39 is interested in the data model especially because it is extensible.

APP: need a design document and discuss data model. Not something that we can decide now, on the spot

### 621 [Describe number selection fully](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/621)

EAO: selection on fractional numbers
It is rare, and we should not make things too complex because of it.

MIH: something we can fix in the registry?
We can always add to the selection function an extra parameter (precision? epsilon?), so that the selection is not done exactly, but the key + / - the epsilon.

APP: I used number as a template for date time and friends.
I would like every function we add to have this kind of associated document.
For formatting and selection functions.

USA: what Eemeli describes sounds a bit like the mathematics for Intl.NumberFormat works (?)

APP: do you take the options specifying the number of digits and apply it to the input (argument?)?
And “squeeze” it in what can be represented as json.
Doing all that is almost like formatting.
I need to understand how to write the keys to make things work.

APP: I discovered unpleasant differences between Intl.NumberFormat and MF1

APP: action items to remove the ordinal, and discuss / decide offset.
Literal match.

MIH: do we really want “integer” now?
Neither ICU nor Intl.NumberFormat have anything special for formatting integers.
So maybe lower priority? Do the minimal thing needed.

APP: let’s have one hour of discussion on this (:plural, :ordinal, :integer, offset)

### 625 [Remove non-registry functions and options from example](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/625)

EAO: please others read and comment this PR

APP: +1 others to write reviews

APP: do we want to format a number as a date?

EAO: yes for numbers as an argument, but not as a literal.

```
.local foo = {42 :number}
{{...{$foo :date}...}}}
```

Would like that to work, but not advertise it :-)

### 630 [Address #629: create invalid expression error](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/630)

APP: we have no error for the “something went wrong when I called the function”
Also includes mismatch error.

TIM: I think we were not typed.
So a type mismatch error seems weird.

APP: should we call it operand mismatch?

MIH: can we have some kind of enum / stable IDs for errors?
Makes it easier to write test suites that are portable between tech stacks (JS, Rust, ICU, etc)
So that I can test that using a certain (incorrect) string we get error “foo”

EAO: shared what he used in the js implementation
https://github.com/messageformat/messageformat/blob/main/packages/mf2-messageformat/src/errors.ts#L29

EAO: what is the status of #598 (“Reserve locally declared patterns”)

APP: out of scope

STA: I’m a bad advocate for this, as I don’t think we should do it. Only added it for completeness.
I think that is the consensus. We should document it. And should not reserve the syntax.

APP: if we don’t reserve the syntax, it can never happen

EAO: hmmm... It can still be a post LDML 45, does not mean “never happen” until we are final (after the tech preview)

MIH: not for it.
We can’t really prevent such concatenations.

One can always do this (with a custom function):
```
.local $foo = {:mf2 pattern=|Hello {$username}|}
{{ I say {$foo} to you }}
```
We don’t encourage it :-), but we can’t prevent it.

STA: I think it is harmless, it is more consistent with what we have, and I don’t understand the strong opposition.

EAO: except for reference to an open tag I see no compelling use case.

MIH: Here is a list of attributes for XLIFF closing  tag
https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/xliff-core/v2.1/os/xliff-core-v2.1-os.html#ec

