# 30 October 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

Scribe: MRR

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

MIH: Worked on Android codebase, looking for strings with trailing/leading spaces (no tabs/newlines). Similar findings to EAO - 0-2%. Found Amharic (Ethiopic script) with trailing spaces - quite a lot of them.

EAO: There was a TC39 call on Intl.MessageFormat. Format of API doesn’t need to change. We dug deep into the specifics of the shape of the returned object of a custom message function call (e.g. to be formatted to string, formatted to parts). Solving it in the best way possible for now.

APP: Next week - Unicode Technology Workshop #1. Doing a presentation on MF2. Will share slides with the group.

## Topic: Action Item Review

EAO: Send link - Done
ECH/MIH: produce unquoted-variant-pattern doc - Done

## Topic: Undelimited Patterns Decision

We will review the options for whether to permit patterns that are not delimited. Prior to the call, Addison merged #503, containing the updated text. We will read this document in the call:
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/text-vs-code.md

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/503 https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/504

APP: ECH and MIH worked on #503. I wrote #504 - just as a set of thoughts that I had. ECH has picked up the text from #504 and put into ‘503 which has resulted in a complicated diff. There’s a lot of good discussion in #503. I’ve merged #503 into main so we have one clean document. Please read text-vs-code.md (above) now. Based on the further discussion after, we might do new PRs / rename the document.

EAO: I’ll share a link to my reply too: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/503#issuecomment-1784110857

APP: Having read the document, since #1 is the current design and proposed solution, who would like to nominate a different item for consideration?

EAO: 3rd option.

STA: Maybe we can eliminate.

APP: Maybe we can eliminate #2 - it’s a footgun machine - it makes all whitespace insignificant.

STA: I don’t disagree but maybe it’s not as obviously bad as it looks. It delegates to the host format.

APP: Ignoring the packaging, once you extract the message, there will be too many cases where there is a space or newline that they don’t want, On the flipside, how do I add space that has meaning to me?

ECH: The difference between 1 and 2 - the braces around the ‘when’ vs around the pattern. The delimiters around the pattern in 2 starts with a ‘close’ curly and ends with an ‘open’ curly.

STA: It helped me realise WYSIWYG is actually tricky. I talked to a bunch of people - they think it starts with the word, not the space. As a civilisation we like to put words inside spaces not out [is this what was said?]

APP: 2 and 3 have very similar syntaxes. Difference being the spaces are not meaningful in 3 and theres a way to quote them.

ECH: Reason I asked my question is that there might be a problem with 2 - the way it interacts with the choices, not the host format.

APP: Anybody want to keep 2.
[No]

APP: Then into oblivion with 2.
I think 4 and 5 are interesting in different ways. 4 is present for completeness. If you want pattern-exterior whitespace, you need a placeholder.

MIH - Non-starter - placeholders are not localisable.

APP: Empty placeholders exist. 

STA: Not advocating but I notice this is what fluent does. It doesn’t work terribly because it’s similar to Fluent, which I worked on and Mozilla uses it. I know EAO is trying to get rid of it… If you need whitespace, you need to make it very visible.

EAO: 4 would allow us to not consider the closing curly brace special. We would be OK having unquoted closing curly braces - we would not need the end of the whole block thing bc the pattern is on the when. I would like 4, but I’m not going to argue for this too forcefully. Closing curlys are more frequent than [missed].

RGN: 4 seems like a spelling variation on 3. Not much difference between quoting the pattern and putting in an empty placeholder. Im not going to argue for it strongly but it’s effectively a variation on 3 with different semantics

APP: I think that’s valid. It has a different quality to it than quoting the pattern in that it doesn’t enclose the pattern, only specific white spaces. You could use it only on one end or the other of messages. … so 4 is a potential.

RGN: I prefer 4 over 3 but it’s not a strong enough preference to go for that

EAO: Same

APP: The placeholders are part of the syntax - if you have an unquoted pattern they would work.

MIH: 4 doesn’t save any character typing if anybody cares about that. It’s not like I’m saving keystrokes, if that’s a criterion for anybody.

STA: Q on placeholders localizable or not. In ideographic or Chinese - a lot of workflows or tooling, you’re not allowed to put a placeholder in a string when it’s not in source. What if the whitespace is in the source? \n wouldn’t be localizable. Would you want to put that in a placeholder

MIH: I think so

STA: Keep it as a non-localizable way of quoting whitespace.

ECH: One thing I think is important is being able to identify the boundaries of the pattern. Compared to 3, 4 makes it more difficult. You have to mentally apply rules for each pattern to work out where the boundaries are. For me, that reason makes it a candidate for not considering.

EAO: I think it’s important we solve expression attributes conversation (for translate: yes/no).
In response to ECH, our own syntax for placeholders supports ignoring whitespace. Expression syntax = curly braces dont matter. People coming at this from non-ICU, hard time seeing whitespace in curlys is not just padding.

MIH: Real example: You’re a translator. I give you a message “Bill gates did something bad/good” You want to put a space in front. How do you put that space and be sure it’s preserved? You can't say “just wrap it” You don’t see the code as a translator. You don’t know how it’s used (e.g. printf/MF1/MF2). For me, plain text messages should really be WYSIWYG - no space trimming. If we trim, you have to give me a way to protect it. If you agree with this part, we would have an inconsistence - we don’t trim on simple but we trim on complex.

APP: I think spaces within patterns. How you define the boundary with this and code. Syntax discussion is interesting with 1 and 4 - there is ink on the boundary. With 504 - if I want to add pattern exterior spaces…[missed]
The exercise is which ones we want to cross out.

STA: I think MIH pointed out an interesting observation that I didn’t see in the doc or previous discussion. MIH, you’ve been championing for people that don’t even know they’re in MF2, which is worth considering. Who do we think will be putting in whitespace? I think a lot of localizers will just see the pattern syntax and they’ll just put whitespace as the first character and it’s up to the serialization layer to preserve that in the syntax.

MIH: The syntax of Java property escaping but you have no way to know how you, the developer, use the string once it’s loaded.

STA: To present text variants, the tool needs to know how to parse it.

APP: Cases 2 and 3 has the MF ‘goo’ - this has to be persisted. Presumably your tools will generate the right thing around that

MIH: If we trim in complex messages, that’s inconsistent.

EAO: I posed a link to the chat : https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/503#discussion_r1375839672
I have identified 2 other situations where the translator may need to add a space. When the source languages is Chinese/Japanese to English. Also, if you’re faking centering of text and the first line is full-width. I think these cases are really rare, and the overlap of these with plural AND the translate working directly in the source AND the developer having not added sufficient context/instructions for the translator on how to handle or quoted. I would present to you that it is really rare and, when it applies, additional info must be passed to the translator. This is if any of these conditions are true AND it’s a variant.

APP: I think you’re over restricting. I agree that it’s relatively rare. We’ll pass on 4 for a second - can we cross off 5 - selective trimming? [no objection]
5 [gone noise].

MIH: Frequency doesn’t really matter - it’s helping the developers doing the right thing. The fact it happens is enough. When it happens rarely, it’s taking developers by surprise (e.g. when a tester finds it) and causing delays (e.g. 1 or 2 days, just because of this tiny thing). It’s expensive in time and effort.

STA: I’m between 1 and 3 at this point. If we had a better clarity around who is going to see this. If we assume most translators will not see the message syntax, only patterns, we should be more open to #1. However if translators do see it, it’s a big problem. Who do we think is going to see this?

EAO: STA - What translators are going to see will be the same no matter what we pick - any reasonable tooling will pick out incidental whitespace or will leave out pattern delimiters. It will add curly braces back in when it’s reforming messages. It’s going to be mostly developers that see the [full] syntax.
Answering MIH - Whitespace on outside of messages - It’s explained further in my first link [above]. I looked into messages that look like whole sentences with whitespace at start/end and you cant know if it’s localizable. The link in my comment is to th41 instances. Only 1 wasn’t localizable - the rest are bugs. What i’m seeing is that, even if we have warnings, the frequency at which devs make mistakes make it so common for translators presuming that it’s not relevant- the signal gets lost in the noise. It’s almost always not a thing they need to care about. It would be really good to trim so it’s possible to have whitespace at start or end but show that it’s intentional - show that it’s signal.

APP: If we have a syntax like 3 with no ink around the pattern and I want to include space round the pattern when I do the translation and it’s a fairly stupid thing that's  doing the translation, I need to include braces to protect that - there’s a case for syntax protection. Because the pattern is not delimited, the space disappears because I didn’t add the quoting. Maybe that’s something we teach people to do but then we’re putting a burden on people up and down the chain. Maybe tooling can help. I’m leaning towards 1 - it makes pattern boundaries universal. I could be convinced that it’s rare enough that I need to include something to show it’s meaningful.

MIH: The Mozilla software is built around browser rendering. You have 2 families of widget - plain text and rich (e.g. HTML). Rich ones are expensive to create. Most widgets are plain text - in this world the rules around what is correct are different to HTML. If I build a list in HTML, you may say it’s wrong to build it using plain text, but that’s how you work in plain text - if you don't want to pay the price for rich widgets. We’re punishing the world that is outside of the Mozilla use case.

ECH: I want to +1 what EAO said - I think that developers are looking at messages, translators will be looking at patterns. APP said about irregularity. The inconsistency would hurt. The consistency of opt1 would work.

STA: Re. inconsistency, there’s another type of inconsistency. In opt1, it’s true there is no trimming but the variant patterns require special syntax. It can be thought of as an inconsistency, especially for someone approaching the syntax for the first time. We must decide which one is less bad.

EAO: I was looking at Mozilla codebase - a lot of it was Firefox and Thunderbird and a lot of it was XML-based rendering. Maybe half of the examples I linked have whitespace. I think it’s pretty representative of current code that we care about. The vast majority of UI is HTML.

APP/MIH: [Disagree].

APP: How many would prefer #4? [EAO, RGN]
#3? [STA]
#1? [ECH, MIH, USA, APP]

APP: We have a general tendency to #1.

APP: We can talk about quote syntax once we’ve decided we want to have quotes.

STA: I know we’ve chosen {{}} because it’s an unlikely first choice but they’ve grown on me. I decided to put 3 as my top choice despite I would prefer a #1 syntax - that’s how my brain works. I’ve talked to people (anecdotal). Noone was surprised by 3 but puzzled by braces in 1. There is something to {{ }} that is worth keeping if we go with 1.

APP: Are there ways we could find consensus around 3? People that voted for #1 / #4?

STA: I have one idea around sweetening the deal on #3 for the #1 camp (it’s a work in progress). What if we disallow newlines in unquoted patterns and use [[]]? You can have the nice-looking syntax over multiple lines for those that like templating languages. Square brackets not special. You could then quote the pattern for extra flexibility. You can then do anything you can imagine.

EAO: In a number of host syntaxes, they will allow for \n to encode a newline. We dont know if it’s originally a \n or a newline

APP: It’ll just be a newline at that point. It’s a separate serialization.

STA: Serializer would have a single line mode that just quotes everything.

EAO: In the source syntax, it’s going to look like \n

APP: It’s hard to design things in the air but it’s valid to entertain different syntaxes to get things in. What you just suggested was similar to 5 with the same challenges - - newline becomes special. It’s challenging because people are then having to count things.

ECH: Re. people favouring #1 moving to support #3. I feel uneasy about the multiline representation and knowing the rule about whats included. I’d rather have quoting around the pattern to put all doubt to rest. I know you have the quoting of the message and the delimiting of the message. {{pattern}} and {placeholder} is fine - it’s just the uneasiness of keeping rules in my head.

APP: I like #3 a lot - it makes it less fussy and I can just have the pattern right away without enclosing. .. but then I’m handing it off to developers, and we’ll get into trouble with people quoting/not quoting. It seems messy. I could accept 3. I think it would have some penalty with #4 in the tooling space.

EAO: Has anybody found external whitespace.

ECH: Our group skews toward webapps. We as a group are skewed in similar ways

MIH: I know EAO’s desktop examples are native, but it’s about what is used to render it. OSes don't have APIs with variants - those may be converted to MF2. I’m reluctant to carve something in store for 20 years because we chose to ignore certain types of use case.

APP: I think the frequency [of ext whitespace] is going to be low. I think the frequency arg in the design doc is correct - it’s about the damage that’s accrued when you encounter the problem.I’m more concerned about us creating a bunch of tripping hazard (e.g. trailing whitespace for labels - you want to keep it for separation. Maybe this is a bug or maybe it’s an i18n pattern / my preference).

EAO: If we don’t care about frequency, do we care about frequency current people are ending up with extra whitespace being rendered. That’s something that there's a lot of. When I look at the code, I see a lot of that compared to the frequency of. It needs to be intentional for whitespace to be there - it will improve localization a lot.

ECH: A Lot of us work in webapps. I’m saying this to contradict EAO’s conclusion. It’s making assumptions about use cases that I don’t think is fair.

STA: I’m not convinced by the argument that this could be a feature. Overall, I prefer that we attempt to design something that doesn’t decide. It’s something that a tool can solve by trimming (or a linter). You could even do a one-time cleanup to deal with those extra spaces.

MIH: It’s a fiar question - what is more damaging? If I see a space and the next sentence starting without, it’s more troublesome. Collapsing spaces in web - who cares. It’s less damaging than missing spaces.
If we make curlys mandatory, it’s less likely to see spaces by mistake - it’s visible that theres a space there. You can end up with extra space by mistake in HTML - I think it’s more likely to see extra spaces in these formats.

EAO: The one message I found with a localizable space out of all locales. It’s nice that I ended up seeing this but is there a codebase that you could point me at to take a look into this. We’re talking about theoretical frequencies then it’s a weak basis to make decisions upon. If you can share e.g. Android codebase, it would be great to take a look.

MIH: We have a lint - if the source has spaces (or not), the translators get a warning.

APP: When I worked in teams that built their own localization tooling, which alerts for spaces and punctuation changes. Instead of arguing about frequency - we need to reach a consensus around whether we’re going to permit unquoted patterns. There's an argument that a lot of a lot of [sic] the time, quoting is unnecessary.

EAO: If we go with #3 it is still entirely possible that a user to still require explicit quoting of patterns and variants.

STA: How do we differentiate code from text in unquoted cases. If we take 1 and allow unquoted patterns, it doesn’t parse.

APP: No, unquoted means something like #3.

STA: So you would always delimit code and decide if you also want to delimit patterns?

APP: That’s right.

STA: That’s a lot of delimiting for someone that wants to delimit patterns.

APP: There's’ a little bit less typing in some ways.
Anybody change their mind?

EAO + RGN: #4 or #3 for me. [Is this correct about #3? - audio glitched]

APP: 4 says for PEW, you have to quote it

EAO: Or add a marker at the end of the pattern

APP: There’s always ink around the pattern.

MIH: I think 4 is worse than 3. At least in 3, I can force developers through a linter to wrap the whole string. With 4 I can’t even do that. If I think it’s a bad idea to have naked strings, at least 3 allows me to make it mandatory.

ECH: +1 to that - I mentioned earlier in the meeting.

MIH: I could do 3 with a gun to my head.

ECH: This is the fundamental difference between 3 and 4.

USA: I have similar thoughts - I could live with it [meaning 3].

MIH: We have 4 people voting for #1, why are we pushing for #3.

APP: I am pushing on whether people are opening to different arguments. Is there an emerging consensus? We’re making progress.

STA: “I could live with it” is an interesting qualification. I’m curious to see if everyone could say this about every variant. EAO, is #1 also an “I could live with it”

APP: We’ve eliminated 2 options.

RGN: We’ve eliminated 5 too, right?

APP: Yes. We eliminated Options 2 and 5.

RGN: None of the others (Options 1, 3, and 4) are objectionable to me.

EAO: Re. using single/double quotes, one of the aspects that really bugs me about an approach like 1 is that I see the curly braces. I maintain an ICU MF1 implementation and, looking at MF1 examples, I still see the braces. Despite having spent a lot of time with it. If they’re trite next to a word, it’s hard for me to not see the braces as part of the word. That’s problematic for me. It’s weird and the character itself is really big. One primary reason we’re talking about having curly braces around the pattern is to tell that what is between the braces is important. At the same time, for placeholders, we’re saying ‘that does not matter, they’re ignored’. I really don’t like #1.

ECH: With WYSIWYG, APP corrected me about it applying to the message, it’s about the pattern.

USA: EAO’s argument is very compelling - the inconsistency we’re introducing. This is an issue with overusing the braces. This is just one way that the confusion manifests.

APP: I think the behavior in code mode is differing than in the quoting of the pattern. The boundary detection is the key thing here. WWith our current syntax, brackets are really for patterns and placeholders and not decorating the code. We’d need to change #3 for that.

STA: This might not be helpful but I’ll be OK with either #1 or #3 and I’ll look to others to give me reasons. If we pick #1, it’s a safe choice but we;’ve heard some strong opinions on GitHub about #1 being the worst option because it’s a mutilation of ideas. If we pick #1, it would be worth re-checking with these people and going outside the group. I remember Shane’s comment. It might evoke some negative emotions.

APP: We don’t have any lived experience with these options.
I’m going to do voting again:
#4 EAO, RGN
#3 EAO (but want 4)
#1 ECH, MIH, USA, STA

Would it help if we entertain syntax variations with any of these?

EAO: I think we’re at an impasse. APP, you might need to put together a ballot.

APP: I will make a more formal vote top priority for this coming Monday.

USA: for 1, would having a different syntax than the overloaded braces option help folks?

STA: We did our best to divide and conquer. We are also voting for delimiter. I said double braces might solve this to a certain extent. Is the Unicode Workshop a good group to run a study with?

ECH: There’s an unconference part to the event.

STA: You could do a task - e.g. convert this message to MF2. We might be making a mistake. There are 8 of us and we’re clearly split.

ECH: You could give us a worksheet like elementary school :)

EAO: This input might have a hard time swaying opinions. How are we determining who is eligible to vote?

APP: My understanding is by member organization. I have avoided voting. Rough consensus and running code are a good way to making standards generally.

MIH: I feel really strongly against #4 for the reasons I explained. With 3, I can make it a linter rule.

EAO: Ballot question could be between 1 and 3. I believe it is group members who are eligible.

APP: [Action] I will go back and check.
I understand that getting input will probably help us but I suspect it won’t change anyone's mind.

STA: We have a very small sample here. The internet is 8 billion opinions. We can go out now and check or hear the feedback once we know it cannot be changed.

APP: I will gather data. I don't know if it will have enough signal in it. If not, then we’ll ballot.

EAO: I’d rather ballot now, save us waiting 2 weeks.
[MIH thumbs up]

STA: We don’t have to wait two weeks - we can do other things.

ECH: I’d be interested to see what comes out of

APP: Who is in favor of balloting now?
Yes - MIH, EAO, RGN, USA
No - 
Both - MRR, USA

APP: [Action] I will make it so.

APP: [re. Wider ballot] I’ll probably go with stack ranking.

EAO: I’m OK with this being a stack-ranking. Let’s see how it goes.

APP: I suspect I will ask for a vote - 1 / 3 / 4. Let me think about that.







## Topic: AOB?

EAO: Are we having a meetup in California
APP: That is most likely. If so, we will need a specific plan for hosting.


