# 25 September 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)


**Scribe:** STA

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

## Topic: Action Item Review

## Topic: Tests

MRR: Last time we talked about testing, we discussed finding a data-only format for fixtures and assertions. One proposed was YAML. I have more thoughts on that: propose Gherkin for test assertions.

APP: Thank you for working on this. We probably still need a few more weeks to digest progress from Seville, but we'll need tests soon.

MRR: https://gist.github.com/mradbourne/f82f29e63597b7f85a12133506daa868; see thoughts.md.

ECH: We’ve talked about file formats a lot in this group. We should be careful to weigh the benefits and costs. We want to be able to represent the data of the test in a way that is easily parsable because there might be consumers and use cases outside of our canonical implementation. For example, Unicode has a conformance test suite project for internationalization functionality, and it is designed in a data driven way: https://github.com/unicode-org/conformance . It represents the test data and expected results as data for which there is a schema to validate it, etc. Using a file format that is common and supported across most programming languages would be beneficial. And all you need to represent any sort of data is the ability to nest maps and vectors (associative and sequential data), which JSON and similar formats support. So there are more considerations and costs to the Gherkin format than are represented here.

MIH: ICU TC has been historically reluctant to add dependencies. For Gherkin, I see an implementation in C built with CMake, and icu4c doesn't use CMake, so that might be a source of friction.

APP: We want any developer to be able to leverage the tests. Even if we author them in one format, we can transpile them into something else, machine-readable.

MIH: This format may be a good testbed for some of the ongoing discussions about escaping and code/text-first syntax. We're effectively embedding messages in yet another container format.

APP: We're not here to test the output of the formatters. We're testing if there is a formatting function that gets called, and whether it received the right set of options. That's tricky.

USA: Eemeli would be quite against using YAML because of its openness. I personally like Gherkin, easy to write. Haven't checked how portable it is.

MIH: A helpful learning from CLDR tests: "expect one of the following results".

APP: Consider submitting a design doc about this.

STA: this requirement that we are not testing formatters/functions. This will go against the portability of test data. The more complex we want to make test assertions, the harder to make it universal. Also question about how to express errors. Errors is something to add to design doc. Other thing, add to registry a built-in formatter for purpose of testing. Then we can define what it does. Could have an example formatter that one could test against. Like formatter that prints what it was passed.

ACTION: MRR: design proposal

ECH: https://github.com/unicode-org/conformance

## Topic: Text mode design issues

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/474

APP: It's important to look at messages typed all on one line. Also important: look at messages in the context of a container format.

MIH: Original design: simple and complex messages. I was convinced through discussions that starting in code-mode will be better. The whole push doesn't bring any new arguments.

STA: But we learned strong opinions about the old arguments.

MIH: Perhaps take a number of example messages and embed them in a file?

STA: was in the code first camp. The way this went is that we attempted a text first mode. Ran into inconsistencies. Staring in code mode was the right solution. I decided to lean into text-first idea again. Recalled that when we announced, there was positive feedback. This is something that might still make sense to continue discussing this. Attempted many different experiments in text editors. Didn’t find perfect solution. Tried to understand what was it about trimming leading/trailing whitespace that made me uncomfortable. Not even for MF, what do you think about trimming? Have suspicion that I may not have a good reason. Not fair to this idea. 

APP: Some of the pieces of data that came up include that the majority of messages are simple messages. Having to decorate the string to make it a MF2 pattern invalidates all of the strings in your resource file, which made me skeptical that MF2 would be successfully adopted. When it comes to complex things, like the match statement, I'm open to … There's a lot of places where I see people use leading and trailing spaces. They're just spaces. What does code mode look like? How natural is it to get the work done, with the minimal amount with visual noise and visual goo. At worst, the current proposals still seem to be better than the current design.

MIH: Not only spaces. Also newlines and tabs and other Unicode whitespace characters.

APP: And users do use tabs in their messages.

MIH: Yes. So it’s not as simple as “just remove spaces”.

MIH: Agree that simple messages should be simple. I could see us have complex messages in curlies.

ECH: It is possible to have messages that begin or end with whitespace. For example, a tool based on the Okapi framework can parse different input document formats and extract messages from it. The messages that it extracts sometimes have whitespace at the beginning or end–it all depends on the format parser being used. If we automatically trim whitespace, then we lose information from the original content, so when we merge translations back into the original document format, we can arrive at problematic content unexpectedly.

STA: What is it about automatically trimming whitespace is a problem? I feel this way, but I have a hard time understanding why.

APP: Let me try to explain. Our format should not be in the business of determining whether a message can or cannot have whitespace at the beginning or end of a message. For example, when consulting for a company, they had a message that have 2 carriage returns at the end of the message, and that message was put inside a for loop within an application. I wouldn’t have designed it that way, but that is a problem for that application. Maybe it is okay to trim if delimiters do not exist, but it should be very easy to add delimiters when you want to ensure whitespace at the beginning or end.

MIH: I want to address the ickiness. Agree with many cases APP listed. Templating is often designed to work well with HTML. But outside that, people are used to WYSIWYG. For example people do * foo\n* bar for bullets. Anotehr example: I wrote a code generator to produce JS, which had to comply with the style checker. Huge problems to get it right. Going from a templating language to strict control of formatting is a long way and requires work.

APP: Agree with the callout about the world outside the Web.

APP: How to make the syntax as natural to use as possible. If I want my job done, how do I do it?

STA: Are we saying that even the ability to escape leading WS in text-first mode is not on par with the code-first, because in code-first we *always* delimit patterns, so the user doesn't even have to realize that they need the WS.

ECH: Didn't we agree that compat with MF1 is not a goal?

MIH: Yes, but this isn't really about compat.

MIH: Simple and complex patterns should have simple rules of trimming.

APP: We're not compatible. We're convertible. I can get behind the WYSIWYG. Keep in mind that MFv2 will primarily be single-line.

APP: Having a syntax is more important than whitespace. We could leave this open (i.e. escaping leading WH or quoting patterns) and focus on the question: how do we get into the code mode? We need to unblock this to get other work done.

Hope to present something at Unicode Tech Workshop and get feedback.

MIH: Re. ivory tower – that's a bit by design, because we also care about a different audience: translators in CAT tools. For every developer writing a message, you have 80 translators struggling with it. 

STA: Are others worried about using curlies for code control as well as for placeholders? To me, 

APP: when it's all on one line, curlies are noise. Hard to distinguish patterns. Played a bit with the pound sign. Many languages have the semicolon to end statements; we'd have the pound to start them. Proposal: let's write a few examples and have a beauty contest. both in the single-line and multi-line formats. Stack rank them and see if there's a clear winner. Whatever we choose, it will have to be learned.

APP: I'll put together a document with some candidates and open a PR. Ask people to contribute their proposal to the PR.

APP: there will be shortcomings to any solution/syntax. What's the minimal amount of shortcomings?


## Topic: Active PR review

- #483

APP: Defer.

STA: Maybe lower priority? I hope we can derive the syntax for nmtoken and name from other syntax decisions.

- #481

APP: Considering ripping it out. Anyone have opinions?

STA: We sometimes need to use non-standard formatting to illustrate a point. Not seeing much benefit for prose.

APP: What do we do?

STA: No need to merge now since the quotes issue was solved through a prettier-ignore comment.

**ACTION: Discuss with Eemeli and remove.**

- #480

No objections to merging.

- #477

STA: There are open comments by Eemeli. I'll address them. Please take a look as well.

STA: Keep open until approved?

APP: The discussions should make into the design doc itself.
Keep open for now, respond to recent comments.

- #475

Two questions from Eemeli need replies.
Incorporate the portability call out into the "potential negatives" section.
Keep open for now.

- #469

Almost done.

- #466
 
Close it, superseded by the more recent open/close design doc.

- #465
 
STA to take over.

## Topic: Design Review: Capabilities for built-in functions

See #457

Merged.

Topic: AOB?


