21 August  2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
* Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
* Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
* Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
* Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

**Scribe:** MRR

### Topic: Agenda Review

### Topic: Info Share

MIH attendance for face-to-face still in limbo

### Topic: Action Item Review

### Topic: Active PR review

PR#456

APP - Too soon to merge. Further refactoring possibly needed - have a look

PR#455

APP - Merged as no objections.

PR#454

STA - This PR introduces a template. Not needed for every single change but for big ideas that would benefit from more structured discussion. It is more work but great benefit.

APP - Like the idea that proper brings something ‘baked’ to present. Use pull requests to address minor things

STA - Example: Open and close. We could start from it being not in the spec and then implement it in this way.

MIH - Agree broadly. Google interchange format doesn’t have open/close.

STA - Idea when ABNF landed that sequence changes could be presented as diff against ABNF. Changing the spec itself as a means of proposing changes. Before jumping to implementation, there should be a place to discuss.

APP - ABNF was helpful at a point where we didn’t have a syntax, just format and registry spec.

EAO - Roughly fine. We can improve later.

STA - [Asks for opinion on template]

APP -  That’s fine. Shall we merge? [Merged]

PR#451

EAO - [Allows us to care less about the styles we use]. It will format for us, even in GitHub editor. We won’t end up with commits on `main` fixing styles.

STA - My objection was to committing directly on `main`. Concerned about polluting `main` history.

EAO - The issue is that allowing people to commit to main without prettier, formatting will be captured in the next PR. Essentially protect the main branch so everything needs to go through PRs.

STA - Prettify only files touched by the PR?

EAO - It gets messy identifying files. This way just works. I suggest that we try it and see…

STA - I will change my review [to approve].

APP - I will merge after EAO’s rebase.

PR#450

STA - This is one of the changes that I’d like to try the new design proposal on. So the next step would be for EAO to write a short doc. I would add a crazy idea to ‘alternatives’ - rather than add new syntax, would allow function chaining.

EAO - Don’t see how chaining functions would overlap with @attributes.

STA - If chaining inside one extension was allowed - the :meta function would…[missed]

APP - My impression is that this isn’t ready to merge so we should defer.

EAO - In general, the use cases I’m trying to have presented in the PR itself are - set locale of expression, flag whether an expression should be translated or not. You could have a variable and a fallback, rather than the default fallback. Expression attributes specifically - things that don’t make sense as function attributes. Not sure if rewinding this PR to use the new process is preferable.

MIH - Overall happy - will look more and will have some comments.

STA - I think it is worth rewinding, also worth rewinding open/close. This is perhaps solving the problem in the wrong layer. Concerned about building a robust solution but only for a fraction of strings (literals). If you want to have a substring in a different language and that sub includes a different variable, you can’t use the same expression. That smells like concatenation.

APP - I have similar use cases, but we don’t want to preclude the different use cases we will want to have [in future] before the fact. It’s easier to make changes in the spec, but Id also be OK with us trying to finish this… I don’t think this is mature and maybe we should table this for next week.

EAO - Happy to table. Re, open/close and proposed process. Open/close is currently already in the spec. I don’t think we pretend we didn’t have discussion. Start from what we have. For expression attributes, I’d be happy to write the document.

EAO - With use cases for +/- and @ attributes, those are different use cases. It would be too many characters required for those. It sounds like I need to put together a design doc and we continue the discussion there.

STA - Disagree about open/close - it’s not part of the consensus. We weren’t able to find anything better so it landed. I would like to remove open/close from the spec and write a doc.

APP - They were the only consensus we were able to reach.

MIH - Don’t think it was consensus. There were vacations. It was “I can live with it”.

APP - I don’t know how we’ll finish it, but we reached consensus. That was where we stopped, unfortunately.

PR#448

STA - We shouldn’t land this. It’s OK to close the PR - its’ going to stay there forever anyway. I can work on this more?

APP - We’ll skip

PR#447

APP - MIH, we will need some changes.

MIH - Current spec is bold/italic are functions you register. This is different - changes the meaning and feels like it pushes the opinion of one person over others. EAO, is it fine for me to change that?

EAO - Let’s continue discussion

APP - Table for next week

PR#440 + #438

Pending on Tim to attend

PR#432

EAO - Continue to invite feedback

APP - My concerns were addressed in the discussion so I recommended a merge.

STA - I don’t remember a discussion that left us happy with this.

APP - The challenge being it might explode the list of stored keys.

EAO - It’s solvable if instead of parsing out a value, to have a match selector that expresses a range and is a boolean. You can get the same results but build it slightly differently.

MIH - My last take was that I don’t like that the selector function should return a strict set of values - let the engine compare. Today, I can do an infinite list of return values. We take away functionality and I don’t understand why.

STA - I’d like to block this. The use case that it prevents are arguable but we don’t know if this is going to be a thing. It’s valuable to keep this as an option for the future. The benefit of specifying just one value in the signature is very slight and might prevent us from doing interesting things in the future.

EAO - I’m going to close as it’s not worth fighting over. Disagree with MIH. Don’t think I’m going to convince STA. MIH: The specific things you get from the value ends up being a limited list. Doing plural format is fine. For range based selection, you would do a custom selector.

APP - that’s taking the functionality and putting it into the selection engine. The extant case is choice-format.

EAO - The way in MF2 would be to define a :range. The overall shape would be. I don’t want to fight this.

STA - Why would this cause complication?

EAO - Functions that are doing the selections are doing 2 things - filter and sort.

STA - You’re moving these to the engine and hard-coding. I think the current state gives more flexibility.

EAO - I don’t think this is a fight worth fighting. This doesn’t matter that much.

STA - I documented my thinking - thanks.

PR#414

EAO+APP - Skip it

### Topic: Open Issue Review
* https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
* Currently we have 72 open (was 70 last time).
* 4 are resolved-candidate and proposed for close.
* 5 are Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.

### Topic: Hitting our date: getting to done by the end of the year
Focus on the tasks that need to be completed:
* Creation of the default registry
* Solving #272 and formatting
* Finalize our namespace and the sigils we use
* Creation of tests

APP - Let’s work backwards from the due date.
	Any tasks missing? [None suggested]

MRR - had a chat with Tim and an exchange with EAO about making language agnostic tests. We have java, c/c++ and EAO’s JS impl. Plan was to and I can help with consolidating use cases into one file. Do we want to have one shareable format/file for each implementation? EAO suggested that a data-only format. Perhaps YAML? Declare tests as YAML files and then test runners in each language. Done a simple implementation. Does that sound like a good idea?

APP - Structure of tests. We should be able to make it into a checklist. It’s an interoperability test too.

MIH - Must not be fragile  - bear in mind iimplementation-specific features

APP - No tests that depend on what the CLDR data says

APP - Write the test for the spec first

EAO - Write invocation, then compare input and output string.

EAO - icu4c and icu 4c in next spring release.

MIH - Yes for Java. Cant’ promise for someone else for C++.

### Topic: Use `text` for private-use/reserved?
See #446

APP - The parser reads the private/reserved expression. Proposal is to undo that, the structure is not completely opaque. This presents one challenge - literals are quoted with bars. If you unreserve a sigil, it would potentially break. Simplify the ABNF to quote upright bars that aren’t being used as quotes.

EAO - Not actually that difficult to implement. Simplifying to would lose us a lot of flexibility later, (i.e. Not having a bar quote within then with different rules than everywhere else

APP - You could unreserve a sigil and apply rules to another sigil. An older implementation would continue to consume and pass through as a blob. The cost is to make | quoted.

EAO - If we parse all as text, later on, we could have syntax that uses a now-reserved annotation that includes, eg, a quoted literal, that breaks parsing in a 2.0 parser. We can’t have a literal in an unreserved block unless we do the thing we’re currently doing.

STA - Is the issue that there are some characters that are wonky when used within reserved body, or is it that there is a specific risk when unreserving specific reserved characters?

EAO - Should we allow for new expressions to use the literal ‘|’?

APP - For adding curly brackets - It’s an inconvenience that you have to quote it, but it makes compatibility with private/reserved OK.

EAO - Fine with us requiring curly braces to be quoted within literals.

APP - All literals would require escaping curly brackets.

STA - I will need to re-read this. Initial reaction - I hope we don’t have to do this.

APP - I’d feel comfortable if we made a PR to discuss this.

EAO - We need more input.

MIH - Something completely different: I don’t know if we’re fully NMTOKEN compatible or not. How should feedback be collected about that

APP - NMTOKENs for what purpose?

MIH - Colleague (Mark Davis) didn’t go into details.

STA - Would like to open an issue to go fully compatible but don’t think we should consider now.

MIH - I’m not pushing for or against, but curious to hear what colleague has to say.

APP - A lot of unicode characters are allowed to be in names.

### Topic: AOB?
Remember US holiday (Labor Day) is two weeks hence.


