# 23 October 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)


Scribe: MIH

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

Unicode Technology Workshop coming up. In the Bay Area (California), Nov. 7-8. Seats are filling up, getting close to our cutoff. Website with details will be fully completed sometime later today: https://unicode.org/events/utw/program/ 


ECH: Info share: Unicode Conference cannot continue. We have a different event. Details and link: todo.

EAO: Info share, TC35 event, JS APIs. Will send a link (todo).

## Topic: Syntax Decision

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/499 


APP: Many people care strongly about certain things. I summarized the main positions.
I would be satisfied with any of the syntaxes.
Focus on the syntax not on ancillary issues.
Summary: about evenly split between 2a and non-2a (1a+3a)

EAO: how do we know that what we decide now is going to stick? And we don’t change it again in a few months.

APP: many people asking “why do I have to wrap simple messages?”

APP: 2a is based on the existing syntax (benefit), clear escaping and behavior. Need to discuss the start of code mode.

Whatever syntax we choose will have explanations on how to use it, and users will have to use them.

APP: Who would object to 2a as a syntax?

EAO: two syntaxes in a trenchcoat. We would be there because of the path we’ve taken, not because it is the best.

USA: also uncomfortable with 2a. Odd from dev experience. Many edge cases that are hard wrt education and documentation.

MIH: I see this all the time in other templating languages. There text-code-text mode things in other programming languages. Can have both mental models. Point is that I don’t find it that confusing.

STA: talking to people outside this group they seem to not care that much. Equally unhappy about both options.
Larger discussion about the process, because it will reflect on how stable is the foundation of these decisions. There is good will, to accept, but we didn’t follow the proper process (use cases, consens, design, etc)

ECH: if people don’t feel strongly, why not take the simplest option? Meaning what we have? Which we hashed out for months, clear understanding on how it works.

Complexity: we all misuse this term. But it can be measured.

APP: 2a example, pasted in chat:
```
{#input {$invites :number maxFracDigits=0}
match {$invites :number} {$responses :number}
when   0   * {You sent no invites.}
when one   0 {You sent {$invites} invite and received no responses.}
when one one {You sent {$invites} invite and received {$responses} response.}
when one   * {You sent {$invites} invite and received {$responses} responses.}
when   *   0 {You sent {$invites} invites and received no responses.}
when   * one {You sent {$invites} invites and received {$responses} response
```

I could live with this.

But how can we find consensus?

STA: on #474, I think the beauty contest was a good exercise, because it helped us narrow down our options, to identify the questions we have. But now we have to answer these questions.
We are now jumping into an (almost) new syntax.
But will this answer our questions? (space trimming, keywords vs sigils, etc)

APP: if we have a core syntax the piecemeal decisions can be driven by that.
1 and 3 are designed for quoted patterns.
If we think that quoting the pattern is distracting, then we end up with 1 / 3.

STA: we are kind of unlucky with our syntaxes. We were forced to come up with a syntax by the CLDR TC. But we seem to repeat the same experience: do a full syntax under pressure. And will again leave people unhappy.
Now we understand this more.

ECH: we put time pressure. But back to “what if we don’t have something in time?” We already have a syntax, that is good. So we have a way to move forward.

EAO: people don’t care that much. The only one item that required explanation was “why do we need to quote the simple messages”

MIH: what bothers me about trying to go piecemeal. We go too much into details. I only care whether patterns will always be quoted. I think we are designing the wrong bits and pieces. I agree that we should answer them individually. One idea would be to put in writing what are the five questions we have to answer.

APP: my frustration is that I kind of agree with everyone that this conversation is a waste of time. The problem are the little decisions: whitespace, namespacing functions, etc.
All are engineering problems.
The giant comment I have with the 3 syntaxes (#499): they are all variations of the same thing.

ECH: also talked to people outside the group, I got questions about why not concatenations? But there are things in i18n that people don’t understand, so there is an inherent complexity.

MIH: I would be able to live with 1 or 3 if we make wrapping the patterns mandatory, in complex message.

STA: I think we have 4 questions
Sometimes when you design something you don’t know what you want.
I think seeing several syntaxes helped people clarify what they like / don’t like about these syntaxes.

Should simple patterns be delimited?
If not, should simple patterns be autotrimmed?
MIH: what about the patterns in complex messages?
Should variant patterns behave the same as simple patterns? How? (Allow naked patterns in both? Autotrim in both?)
Should statements be delimited separately or as a group?
Do we prefer sigils or keywords? Both? Each single sigil makes logical sense, but how do we not end up with ~9 of them?
MIH: start in text mode or code mode? (might be answered from the above questions?)

MRR: context: did some UX design. We have ideas in our minds about various kinds of users. User skill level, file formats, what’s the most important.
Can we capture all of these assumptions?

APP: if we are clear about requirements, and prioritizations, some of the questions will answer themselves.
One thing we rejected was having a file format.
This is why I pushed people to look at a single line.
Some people will compile to our syntax, not just write our syntax.
If we agree that ALWAYS quoting the patterns 

EAO: I can probably live with 1 / 3 plus mandatory quoting.
Would be a compromise, nobody happy about it. We can land, iterate, and have some consensus.

MIH: internally I shared with Stas an example of the costs of being flexible in space trimming, or escaping. Something a bit too flexible in the original English message resulted in several hours spent by a few engineers, and updating X translated strings. And that kind of problem shows up almost every week.

APP: would updating the syntax to help us answer the questions we have? Probably not.
I agree that it is good to have a base: do we start in code / text. Whitespace trimming (we have a grudging agreement?)
I would not design 2a, but it might be a good starting point to iterate from.

STA: some of the small decisions were in fact proxies for the questions above.

—

MIH: as a note taker. Sorry, the discussion got a bit heated, I got involved, and I missed taking notes :- 

But as a summary: can we start from one of the options (any?) with tentative agreement for “always quote complex patterns”? And iterate from there.

Consensus: 2a + “ugliness” (make complex patterns double quotes).
So that nobody likes it and it is guaranteed to change.

```
{{ match {$count :plural}
   when 1 {{You have one new message.}}
   when * {{You have {$count} new messages.}}
}}
```

MIH: Can we also say it (in the spec) that we don't trim spaces in simple messages.
As a starting point.
This is what the MF APIs can see. The container file format might trim, but that is not our concern.

Action item: focus on https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/pattern-exterior-whitespace.md
Changes expected from ECH & MIH

