## Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
* Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
* Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
* Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
* Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
* Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)

Scribe: SCL (thank you!)

## Agenda

### Topic: Agenda Review
* https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/meetings/agenda.md

EOA: Backward compatibility with MF1?

### Topic: Info Share

EAO: PR in messageResource WG regarding resource format - https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg/pull/11

### Topic: Action Item Review
* none

### Topic: Function Registry (continued)
Requested by: STA
STA considers not a dependency of other discussions.

Discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.

### Topic: First-match vs. best-match
* Requested by: APP
* Document: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/aphillips-issue-351/exploration/selection-matching-options.md 
#351

EAO: Add example around non-order specific benefit of adding new translation at end saving translation resources.
What about when there are multiple lines hitting the same score? What result?

ECH: CLDR and ICU added new rules for romance languages (ex: `fr`, `pt`) recently in 2020, whose plural formatting of compact notations was not represented. The plural rules for those locales needed to add a plural category to the plural rule set for those locales (category name `many`). That required messages with plural selectors in those locales to be updated to add variants for the newly added `many` plural category.

MIH:  Translator tool may not have control over order of translations? But it’s just one string. Do any tools understand these strings as separate entities? New requirement on translation tooling to understand order.

MIH: First match case has the potential to break backward compatibility with MF1.

EAO: Understanding of which selectors get picked, reliance on function registry. Votes for column-first match with star as optional. 

APP: Languages like `ja` don’t have a rule for the `one` plural category, so the `other`/`*` category is necessary
‘One’ fires in some locales for ‘21’.  

SCL: Question: if the parameters passed in are `0 1 1`, what it match under first match, and under best batch? Should the `*`/`other` contribute less to the match score because they are default catch-all cases?

APP: Look at the table in the FAQ that shows an example of scoring an input. Note that in the case of plurals, the `*` is equally meaningful because it is the same as the `other` plural category, which has rules defined for it.

STA - leans towards not requiring the \*. 

STA: worried about cases in column first where we hit dead ends when first column is too good of a match. Opinion: first match is simplest choice. Not a lot of accidental complexity. Algorithms for calculating match scores have high cognitive load. Somewhat opaque. Requires certain level of trust. 

EAO : Column first allows for leaving out the \*. Allows for having the default first. 

ECH: complexity argument not well stated. Fist-match may be easier to understand and implement, but then creates a dependency on the ordering of variants. The dependency on ordering then creates problems for the example of plurals where the target locale’s plural categories are different from the source locale, or when a new plural category is added to a locale’s plural rules set. There is inherent complexity in the system, and first-match tries to shift it around, but doesn’t reduce it. Importantly, when dealing with MF1 legacy messages, they are best-match because they are written without a dependency on ordering. Want to be able to upgrade those messages without changing behaviour. (Main concern)

MIH: The first-match approach expects translators to know and write what is best order based on rules they may not have access to.

EAO: Keep in mind for MF1 - we do have a best match algo, however it is very specific case in plural select. Anything other than first match introduces dependency on the function registry. 

APP: MF 1 can be converted deterministically by knowing the rules on both sides.

APP: Best match separates keyword selection from ranking algorithm . Need to 

APP: When comparing to MF1, we’ve gone from nesting selection to matrix based selection for MF 2.0. I think this matrix based selection wasn’t necessary in MF1 because you had nested messages that encapsulated the return value for any selector.

MIH: MF1 also required the `other` variant case, which was also important to make the selection message un

MIH: What does function registry dependance mean in the case of best match code? Don’t need it at all in general.

STA: Migration path is possible from MF1 to MF2. Not easy but possible. Complexity is there in all options. Combat complexity with predictability. Like CSS specificity. Still confuses a lot of people. Who are we optimizing for? Localizers, if working with fragments of string, have no visibility into complexity of selectors. Best matchers use scoring variant, First match is a boolean system. Less cognitive complexity for both developers and translators.

APP: Possible to write best match in a canonical order that is also first match. 

EAH: dependency on function registry based on “1” vs “one” . Defining spec order means there is a validity dependency on order/function registry. Column first allows for boolean decision tree. 

MIH: Who needs to figure out the ordering mechanism? Scoring may be non-intuitive, but complexity is understanding row tuple ranking. What about column matching. Apply mer column MF1 pattern.  Sort by first column, then second, etc. Get lexographical sort. Gives a mixture of best match vs first match. Does complexity come from understanding how columns rank against each other.

STA: Scoring is just an implementation detail. Exponential complexity potential, but unlikely. Easier to understand with just a few cases and variants. With hundreds of variant (arabic languages) will be cognitively hard to understand regardless. If this is 
largely about plurals (it is) then we already know the rules.

ECH: Not removing complexity with first match. Still have tuples to avoid nested selects. Has preference for column first match - stable sort.

APP: Filter then sort column-based for best match. 

MIH: would what Elango proposed be acceptable? Impossible to prove that no one can come up with a good use case. If MIH describe that algorithm, consider it?

EAO Best match explicitly prioritizes the columns. Selection is still partly a black box. Preference. 1) Column match with optional star. 

SCL: First match can be described in a single unambiguous sentence. Makes it a compelling choice.

STA: Why ok to order on selectors/cols, not ok to order on variants? 

EAO: Col first with optional star, first match, col first with req star

ECH: column first, best match distant sec, first match distant third

MIH: Best Match first. Col first lexo, star mandatory second, 

RGN: Col first with optional star, first match, col first with req star

SCL: first match, col first, star opt second

STA: first match, best match, col match with opt star

APP: sorted col first, allergic to first match 

EAO: primary audience for writing is developers, reading them is translators.

STA: What is the reason for a “1” override, or a ‘2’ override? Who does that? Polish may want to have explicitly tooling for plural “2” to make it sound natural.

