# 03 July 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Zibi Braniecki (ZBI) - Amazon
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Matt Radbourne (MRA)

Today’s Scribe: STA

---

## Agenda

### Topic: Agenda Review

### Topic: Info Share

- Presentation at CLDR event
- https://thenewstack.io/whats-next-for-javascript-new-features-to-look-forward-to/
- EAO: PHP is interested in MF2.

### Topic: Action Item Review

[x] STA: file known issues against function registry

### Topic: Active PR review

### Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues

Currently we have 73 open.

### Topic: Open/Close function syntax, naming, and immutability.

_We have multiple proposals for open/close function markup, including the current scheme (+function/-function). Let's resolve how to support open/close functionality. These proposals partly exist to address the problem of negative literals, given our use of -function currently.
We have also been discussing whether let statements should be immutable. If they are immutable, there is a proposal that they use a different sigil from $ or that they use a two-character sigil (such as $$localVar). Note that separating the sigil allows for static analysis of local variables as called out by #403. This can be a separate concern from whether they are immutable.
PR_

Proposals:
Make local variables use a different sigil
If yes, use one character or two? Which character(s)?
Make local variables immutable?
Change open and close sigils to avoid -?
If yes, what sigils or sequences to use?
Should name, etc. use Nmtoken or some other rules?

### Topic: Discussion of default registry requirements

_An open question is whether MFv2 will provide a default registry of functions/selectors that implementations are required to implement. If such a registry were created, what should go in it (what are the inclusion criteria)? If we do not create a default registry, how will we prevent divergence of the syntax between implementations?_

**CONSENSUS:** to have a core registry

MIH: propose text and proposed XML for default registry

### Topic: AOB?

## Notes

### Topic: Active PR review

Discussing https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/404

STA: Any reason why there are 2 private-use sigils?

APP: One can be implementation-specific, the second one can then be left for private use by the impementation's users.

STA: No objection to these particular sigils, but just noting that we need a larger sigil-focused discussion and private-use should be considered to be at the bottom of the hierarchy of needs. If we need & someplace else, then we'll change the reserved syntax.

Discussing https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/393

MIH: Good to have a formalization of the data model. But wouldn't use JSON for it.

EAO: The JSON schema is a "MAY implement" statement. It's informative.

STA: I'd like to ask to postpone merging; didn't have time to review yet.

Topic: Discussion of default registry requirements

USA: https://notes.igalia.com/zIhRAUfURuWqRIa18kcjTQ?both#Others

EAO: Support anything that is a subset of JS.

MIH: Happy with most of what's in ICU, but doesn't have to be exactly the same API. Open to discuss skeletons vs option bags.

APP: Want a minimal portable option set. Decided whether we permit extension. If so, how?

EAO: Absolutely need to allow extension.

APP: Full extension, with overwriting?

EAO: AI to propose something from the ICU point of view; then check against the JS PoV. In case of Intl.MessageFormat, we're adding it into the ECMAScript spec itself.

MIH: On extensibility: I'd forbid overwrites, but encourage namespacing, e.g. `goog.number`.

APP: General agreement to have the core registry; need more work to figure out what it looks like and what's in there.

MIH: Propose the core registry functions in form of registry definitions.
MIH: Draft of the strategy for how to extend and use the core registry.

### Topic: Open/Close function syntax, naming, and immutability.

Discussing new sigil namespace for local variables.

STA: Context: the goal is to enable static analysis and detect typos and referencing unknown local variables.

EAO: Any additional sigil/symbol has a high cost to users.

APP: Separate sigils address the immutability question. If they are separate then it's clear that message arguments are immutable.

STA: Separate sigils make immutability of local variables orthogonal to immutability of message arguments (which is axiomatic).

EAO: How about: Change let to set; don't talk about declarations but instead talk about definitions.

STA: Would that also apply to message argument names?

EAO: I continue to think we should have lexical scope and sequential order of setting variables.

APP: It will be very hard or impossible to have perfect static analysis of message arguments.

Take the temperature of the room: EAO opposes.

EAO: Don't see the value and like the current simplicity of the single sigil.

EAO: (Presenting an idea to drop $ completely.)

STA: Let's switch to immutability, since we're not making progress on sigil namespaces.

APP: More willing to accept local immutability with separate namespaces. Makes all variables (message, local) behave the same.

EAO: With mutability, we can use local vars as typing annotations: `let $count = {$count :number}`.

MIH: Cognitive burden, requires to consult the spec to know what will happen. People will use it rarely and will get it wrong. Wrt. type annotations, if the callsite changes, the annotation gets out of date.

APP: It's more of a type assertion. Also, without nesting, it's reasonable to expect that people will want to do 2-3 things to a value. Not having to come up with a new name makes it easier.

STA: Allowing mutability makes us more lenient in accepting input. People can still choose to come up with new names for each let if they want to.

EAO: Using the same name is a way to avoid errors.

MIH: Are there programming languages in which let can be overridden like it's suggested for MF?

TIM: It sounds like we're discussing lazy vs. eager. Maybe we should start with that?

—

## Chat (verbatim)

````
You
9:32 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gJ92S0roqvXYmv7mmKb2ICQsZ5Z5XSn6WLgGFNcq6S0/edit
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
9:34 AM
Eemeli is here: https://indie88.com/setenil-de-las-bodegas/ Cool!
Ujjwal Sharma
9:57 AM
https://notes.igalia.com/zIhRAUfURuWqRIa18kcjTQ?both#Others
Ujjwal Sharma
10:07 AM
given the TC39 process, we can assume that any changes to the builtins would be backwards-compatible if that helps
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:19 AM
let & mutable does not change anything for me
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:22 AM
s / let & mutable / set & mutable /
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:33 AM
would also make "markup-like" construct uglier: : {|strong| :html} instead of {strong :html}
Zibi Braniecki
10:38 AM
what's the use case of mutable values?
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:39 AM
``` let $foo = {13} let $bar = {$foo} let $foo = {42} {Values are $foo and $bar} ``` Results: Values are 42 and 42 Values are 13 and 42
Zibi Braniecki
10:47 AM
what's the use case for foo override?
Stanisław Małolepszy
11:04 AM
a more realistic example: let $item = {$item :noun case=accusative} let $item = {$item :article defined=yes} let $item = {$item :capitalize case=title}
Zibi Braniecki
11:04 AM
why would you do it in a single message?
why would you want to have 3 different values for `item`?
Stanisław Małolepszy
11:05 AM
Because there's no nesting of function calls.
Zibi Braniecki
11:05 AM
is it about nesting?
ah, understood
Stanisław Małolepszy
11:05 AM
And I may want to do these things in a certain order
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:06 AM
And my "counter" is that you can do this: let $item1 = {$item :noun case=accusative} let $item2 = {$item1 :article defined=yes} let $item3 = {$item2 :capitalize case=title}
Zibi Braniecki
11:06 AM
so this is about processing *the same value* with multiple processors in a given order
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:06 AM
use intermediate names
Zibi Braniecki
11:06 AM
not really about having different values assigned to a single variable
Zibi Braniecki
11:07 AM
we never want to have: let $item = { $emailAddress :capitalize } let $item = { $newPictures :number}
my take is that overwriting a variable to achieve nesting is a blunt tool for the task
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:08 AM
+1
Zibi Braniecki
11:09 AM
I'd prefer: let $item = $foo { :noun case=accusative } { :article defined=yes } { :capitalize case=title }
Ujjwal Sharma
11:11 AM
(let ([x 5]) (displayln x) (let ([x 6]) 	displayln x))
works in racket 😅
You
11:13 AM
let $bar = {$foo :number}
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:17 AM
eager + overriding value brings back circular dependencies: $foo = {13} $bar = {$foo} $foo = {$bar}
Stanisław Małolepszy
11:18 AM
Mihai: on the contrary? line1: foo = 13, line2: bar = 13, line3: foo = bar = 13.
lazy + overriding would indeed be problematic
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:24 AM
$foo = {13} $bar = {$foo} $foo = {$bar}
harder to read, but not ambiguous
````

—

Next steps

Meet next week (instead of in two weeks)
Read https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/299
