### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Simon Clark (SCL)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)

Scribe: Simon Clark - SCL

# Action items

- NEW: APP to check on license for software, test suite
- NEW: APP to update deliverable wording
- NEW: ALL: read function registry PR

Next call: 8 May 2023

## Agenda Review

## Info Share

SCL: managed to get a couple interns. Want to build an in browser message editor in JS.
MIH: does the JS implementation by Eemeli play for you from gh? There’s a library
STA: there is one for MF1 also
MIH: also a sandbox where you can play with FLuent one.
STA: I wrote that.

STA: also this https://format-message.github.io/icu-message-format-for-translators/editor.html

SCL: more than text area
STA: there is a library @@@ and maybe vscode uses it. Need to go from our abnf to treesitter syntax. Not an LL but a PEG. Generates grammar and can build syntax highlighting and syntax analysis.

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
6:40 PM
ICU4J: https://icu4j-demos.unicode.org/icu4jweb/formatTest.jsp

## Reserve sigils for future use

- Requested by: APP
- #360 #374
  Can we merge? EAO reviewed, Stas not blocking it.
  Allow reserve sigil to come first. Prevent trailing spaces from becoming part of the message
  No objections to merging. Going ahead.

## Schedule and release plans

- requested by STA
- Function Registry is big outstanding topic needing clarity. Is key large scale thing needs addressing.

Target is August release of ICU

MIH - several open discussions tat need resolution

APP - what are our exit criteria to meet the release date? Spec clean up, implementations required, function registry spec,

STA - test suite requires definition

APP - Doesn’t formatting numbers and dates require function registry? - required for initial release

MIH - big JSON file from EAO that can be run through test at https://github.com/unicode-org/icu/blob/main/icu4j/main/tests/core/src/com/ibm/icu/dev/test/message2/FromJsonTest.java does not give same result as JSON

```
new TestCase.Builder()
                .pattern("match {$foo :plural} when 1 {one} when * {other}")
                .arguments(Args.of("foo", "1")) // Should this be error? Plural on string?
                // expectedJs: "one"
                .expected("other")
                .build(),
```

STA - discuss big ideas and list of deliverables today? Meet some other time to triage list that MIH posted?

APP - look at list of deliverables to confirm we are still aiming for the right target.
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md
1 is easy to complete: STA
2 is well done.

APP: What is the formal definition of the data model?

MIH: There is a typescript representation:

EAO JSON schema as formal language description of data model -

MIH - not runnable implementation necessarily.

APP - what would JSON schema describe? What do we need to write, and how do we assess if it has met our goals?

MIH - Typescript schema description can be found at https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/experiments/experiments/data_model/ts_mihai/src/imessageformat.ts

EAO - datamodel defines what is important in what is represented by the syntax. A parsed interface level for what a message looks like
Gives an implementation an interface to transform messages. Allows, for instance, tooling to authoritatively rename a variable. Should not require an implementation to use the data model. Eg: spec does not define if functions can be redefined.

APP If I want to implement MF2, we have ABNF, what more do I need to write an interoperable implementation.

EAO - data model is significant because it has transformed our own internal thinking on what an internationalized message can look like. Universal tool that can represent any message in any language.

TIM - analogous to ECMA script lexical definition / spec. Prerequisite for release if we want good implementations

STA - requirement to ensure interoperable implementations. JSON schema would be valid way to define.

EAO - https://json-schema.org/

APP - we have similar but slightly definition of what a data model needs to look like
Can we flesh out what we want to deliver by the fall?
3 - mapping to XLIFF and back? Post release according to MIH and EAO.

STA- point of XLIFF was to ensure nothing blocks working with XLIFF, not necessarily required to define in order to deliver.

EAO - XLIFF spec of MF2 will likely be dependent on MessageResource2.0 spec as well.

MIH - How to represent metadata that is outside the MF2.0 message body?

APP - 4 - how to merge data model with current arguments - resolve to string

EAO - 4 best way to answer deliverable is ???

MIH - 4 is to define behaviour that is not described in the spec.

EAO - keep “resolving” wording

APP - get rid of the “translations” wording

TIM - should define what we mean by resolving in this contex.t It is an overloaded term

EAO - “resolving/Resolution” should be added to here

EAO - formatters that output html or reach components, etc, should all be valid messageFormat2.0 implementations

APP - replace “translations” with “messages” - consensus reached.

MIH - output can change based on use cases- display vs text-to-speech, etc.

TIM - string output useful for validation of implementations, not required for valid implementation

EAO - Some parameters may be complex objects that are intended to pass through. This is useful, and our current spec handles it well.

STA - the resolution could be ???

MIH - steps in process: turn message into datamodel (decision tree), insert parameters, prune unused branches to to single path. Resolve parameters to output.

EAO - interfaces of ICU and fluent are quite philosophically similar. Implementations are not.

APP - resolution means “you take this message, and these parameters, and you get this result”

STA - suggest “evaluating messages”

APP 5 - Is about validating implementations. Is not code, but a set of test cases.

MIH - challenges - upput may be different for different uses, may change based on function registry.

EAO - attempt to be minimally dependent on any function registry. Requires at least some function registry calls, as that is important part of spec. Hopes someone
else can drive test suite - non implementor, possibly?

APP - test-suite is closely tied and coordinated with requirements / spec

EAO - ensure test suite data is released in appropriately open license. Re: licenses, the Unicode License Agreement for Data Files and Software is open source, but it does not cover text like the Technical Standards.

SCL - test suite - mock of FR functions? Separate function registry testing from MF2 implementation

EAO - may be optimistic to include proper spec for function registry. Could include function that simply serializes inputs

STA - test cases should be semantically well-formed. Should be exemplary of good MF2.0 usage.

EAO - happy with anything in the javascript set of formatters in the function registry.

EAO - Would like to be able to test at least 2 different outputters ???

MIH - Test suite should be portable,

EAO - overlap between javascript formatters and ICU formatters.

## Function Registry (continued)

- Requested by: STA

Discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.
