16 October 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference
Attendees:
Please fill “attendee” block with your name, affiliation and a 3-letter acronym for the scribe to use (see examples in “previous attendees”):

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Vincent de Lau - PHP-FIG (VDL)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
- Marc Espérance Kamga
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Toral Cowieson - Unicode (TDC)

Scribe: USA

## Topic: Agenda Review

EAO: Would prefer to do smaller PRs (e.g. input + local)

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: For the Intl.MessageFormat JS API, we’re doing an incubator call for the TC39 delegates who are interested to discuss the API shape, specifically error handling and custom formatters. I’d add a link shortly for anyone interested in attending.

## Topic: Action Item Review

MRR: Design proposal for tests
APP: Thanks for submitting the doc, I’d mark the AP as “done”. We might not get to discuss it this week, but I’d urge folks to take a look.
APP: Schedule and location of next F2F

APP: I’d bring this up next week.

## Topic: Syntax and the "Beauty Contest"

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/493 

APP: There are two main groups we can divide the votes in. 0 is either low or high on people’s lists. Apart from that, people voted for either 1a or 2a highly. As a reminder, 0 is our current syntax which starts in code mode. 2a is Mihai’s proposal for text-first, code mode after. 1a is “invert for text mode and distinguish statements from placeholders”. The 3 series are the ones that use curlies for code mode.

EAO: Can we remove some of the less popular alternatives from consideration? Narrowing down the possibilities should help.

STA: I found 5 quite interesting, but I feel that it’s related to 2. It introduces this notion of a block that’s introduced by a curly and pound sign.

APP: So I think we should preclude the less popular options.

MIH: The discussion is not just about which mode to start in but about quoting and trimming.

APP: We came to a conclusion about quoting last meeting. I understand that the mode determines what’s quoted and what isn’t but the trimming is purely a detail of the syntax. If you look at the example, it shows quoted whitespace in the patterns.

STA: The example doesn’t show what happens in the hello world case.

EAO: One question about the 3 series: are we considering that to be specifically using the pound sign as a leading sigil or are we generally considering this with something different. My main concern with 3 is that this syntax is going to be misparsed by a number of syntax highlighters. For example in the YAML spec or the behavior of .properties, it’s going to be parsed well but highlighted improperly.

APP: The pound sign was not chosen for no reason but we could change our mind about it if we have an informed reason to do so. It’s not embedded in my heart. When we were in Seville, the first thing that came to my mind was pound because of some prior art, but I don’t actually care as much as long as it makes sense. In that case the pattern string might be quoted.

EAO: My preference is to choose another sigil if we proceed with 3 but at the same time not hold back the option due to concerns about the sigil.

MRR: I was really interested in hearing if the group was interested in using any existing syntax like jinja.

APP: If there’s one that we’d prefer, then sure. But we aren’t building a templating language. We have very minimal feature overlap. Therefore a lot of templating syntax is very overkill for us. I think there’s a related syntax in 1b which was super interesting. I’d have gotten rid of the double curlies.

STA: We discussed templating languages a lot and I thought we could use one. Developers prefer to stick to an existing syntax but even if we did, we’d not be able to match them completely. We could mimic jinja but not exactly since we’d have different whitespace handling etc. So I’ve suggested a syntax proposal that’s close but it’s a challenge and there’s a number of footguns hidden in the details here.

ECH: On 1b, as part of my vote, for grins and giggles, I counted the number of curlies and such. I feel that it’s too verbose for our needs. The fact that we can have autotrimming, it’s one of the larger footguns. I was concerned that we’re trimming ASCII whitespace. There’s languages that use non-ASCII whitespace where we might run into footguns. Mihai gave an example of certain CJK languages where non-ASCII whitespace is used before names. Just the autotrimming can be quite problematic. That’s there beyond all the discussions about code mode and sigils and everything. If you’re able to start in code mode or delimit patterns then you’re better off, therefore my vote.

APP: Likewise, there’s a few cases where the lack of autotrimming would be confusing to people. But I agree that we should discuss what we want in terms of whitespace handling. In terms of character counting, I’m specifically trying to avoid too many curly monstrosities since that’s a major stumbling block for the MF1 syntax. If we got rid of trimming then we won’t need that.

SCA: There’s three things: text that will be outputted, code that would be executed and then code that will be executed and not outputted. I’m judging things based on readability and unambiguity.

VDL: What I see in 3a is that you can opt-in to preserving whitespace by enclosing the output in a block. I’m web focussed so might be biased but opt-in would be helpful.

ECH: Readability is important. If you’re interested in the curly count then I can share a link and you’d notice that the option you suggested isn’t much better either.

APP: One thing I like about 3a is that it doesn’t use …

USA: concur about curly bracketed monster thing. Could make things hard to write. Also agree with elango. Don’t make 

MRR: I wanted to agree with Vincent. The example in 3a actually indicates the preservation of whitespace. It was really clear and drew me to it. I’m thinking a lot about the single line representation of messages and that’s something our tooling really benefits from so I value that higher.

EAO: one thing I mentioned in github is that one big differentiator is the amount of work that goes into editing messages. Taking 1a for instance, what does it take to do a common operation? Moving from the “hello user” message to something more complicated, what are the actions the user needs to take? In the case of 3a, you’re adding directly at the start the input declaration. In case of 2a, going from a hello user to a variable, but you’d need to change the structure of the message in order to make this relatively minor change. You’d need to go through a lot of trials and tribulations to do something which I feel is a very common operation. To me atleast, this is the more important thing to consider here.

STA: Relatedly, I understand this line of reasoning. It’s important to think about the mental model of people using these syntaxes. In this specific example, there’s simple and complex messages. Switching from one to the other might not be very simple but is ergonomic in that it makes sense to do that transition to developers. Non-developers have no issue understanding that match statements are special and you can’t move them around even though they’re surrounding by curlies. When showed to a developer, one immediately tried to put text in front of a match. Anecdotal evidence but I’d like to highlight that there would be different mental models at play here and not all of them could be predicted by this group.

MIH: In the example with hello in the input, there’s no reason for that to exist. The description is in the variable itself. The benefit of onput is reusability in case of the select. You don’t want to describe an expiration date with complex parameters.

STA: There’s other cases of this syntax.

SCA: The examples illustrate the common operations.

MIH: Sure but they’re not all equally common.

VDL: I don’t understand why we have input in the statement .

EAO: We need it in order to allow for specific naming stuff to happen. When variables are being imported and then used in the message with some added functionality on them.

ECH: To address the 2a comment about the complexity jump. Basically, that’s a tradeoffs, which is what all of this discussion is about. Our current syntax actually avoids curlies a lot more, all things considered but there’s a lot more tradeoffs to consider. For instance, a lot of messages are going to benefit from starting in text mode. So by making the less common thing harder, we’re making the common case much easier.

APP: Single line authoring is important to me, that’s how a lot of people will encounter our stuff. 

SCA: I was originally a supporter of 1a, but 3a is growing on me because which mode you’re in at any point depends on that line only and that’s an extremely attractive quality.

STA: I have an observation about family 3 of proposals. I like that despite issues, it tries to avoid using curlies for everything. And while we have relied on braces a lot so far, using different syntax might help in a lot of ways such as improving readability and discoverability. So I propose going back to that discussion. Let’s save curlies for placeholders and use other syntaxes for everything else. I was looking into the game modding and translation communities and I noticed a much higher use of block brackets and pipes, so that could be really interesting.

EAO: Echoing what Stas just said. One thing we reached agreement on was to to limit patterns to have those delimiters be exclusively for placeholders. Last time we discussed the use of double curlies for whitespace conservation. This is what upsets me about 2a because that feels like something in the opposite direction: going all in on the matter of curlies. Watching how similar 2a and 5 are, I wonder why 2a is a lot more popular. Is it due to sunk cost?

STA: Crimming (it’s required in 2a whereas its optional in 5a)

APP: 5a exists because in my noodling around on it was okay. It’s not so beautiful and possibly only appealing to programmers.

Currently we have 4 main options.

STA: Is it just 3a or the entire 3 family?

EAO: My reservation about 3b is that because this pound bracket syntax is used for other things, you could have the same or similar syntax mean a very different thing. 

STA: Fixing up some details, the 3rd family seems tenable to me. I like this sigil but I understand the reservations. What I still cannot wrap my head around is last week’s topic, the one about auto trimming. I feel that it’s incredibly hard to get it right so allowing people to preserve whitespace could be pretty useful. Our audience could be split in half about this.

APP: You’re always allowed to quote the pattern in order to preserve whitespace. Auto trimming could be a tripping block in some cases though.

ECH: My concern about the optional autotrimming is that we’re unfairly punishing languages that don’t use ASCII whitespace which could make authoring error-prone in those languages.

VDL: Why not treat all whitespace equally?

EAO: Talking more specifically about the CJK whitespace issue, it’s used in Chinese and Japanese languages. My question is that is this a concern practically though? There is a way to achieve this but I understand that it’s rare in current usage.

ECH: We don’t need curlies as the delimiter for everything. But it could be anything. The important thing here is to make sure this case not as confusing as it seems to be in this case.

USA: what eemeli just said, what when you have a space you might not even know how it would behave and you’d get unexpected behavior

EAO: One way of avoiding this would be to treat the idiographic forward whitespace similarly.

MIH: One argument I’d try to make for making trimming the default and make it opt-in to not trim is that these messages are stored in all kinds of formats. When you store this in a file format, you don’t know what you’re getting. If I use get text, in certain cases things would unexpectedly change due to autotrimming.

APP: For clarity, are you talking about just simple messages with no selector? Can we have consensus not to trim simple messages by default.

MIH: I agree with you but it’s about the mental model. I don’t like the inconsistency. 

APP: In the 3 series, we could say that you MUST quote the pattern.

EAO: You didn’t mention how .properties work. In that case, they trim whitespace. There is a popular message format that follows the same trimming behavior. ECH: would autotrimming be less impalatable if we also include idiographic forward whitespace. If the main concern driving people towards favoring 2a is this autotrimming problem, parking that discussion for later, could we have some degree of agreement for using the 3 family as a base for building this?

ECH: If we do reach a new consensus where it’s not opt-in to delimit patterns, 3a is just 2a with extra characters.

MIH: Similar concern. It feels like we’re zig zagging in no particular direction. I don’t even understand what it would mean to do this while going for the 3rd family. The thing is that my storage format already changes the spaces, now my API would do the same. It reminds me of the kind of triple escaping that exists in Android XML files.

STA: I’m trying to build a mental model for our discussion: one issue is auto trimming vs explicit whitespace and the other is whether we want to build complex messages progressively or in one go. If you look at 3b, if you mentally substitute #() for curlies, this is literally option 1. Maybe we had too many of those because some of them repeat the same approach in different clothes.

APP: 3b and 4 are basically the same option. Except that 4 went all the way to “no keywords”.

MIH: The trouble in 3b is that if you’re doing the trimming and you’re not being forced to use the curlies, it’s unclear what’s part of the message. The good thing about curlies is that you always escape them. You don’t always escape pounds.

STA: You’re right, I’m just pointing out the different families within these proposals. Another axis would be “do you want to be bound to the decision to use only curlies”? Maybe text mode would benefit a lot from a bit of an extra cost.

APP: The most popular option is 1a. It uses curlies as a code delimiter and uses a sigil to distinguish statements from placeholders. It has a lot of the advantages we were just discussing. The double curly is a downside but it could be overlooked. We need to choose a direction.

STA: I propose we don’t make a final decision today. This has been really productive. I’m not sure anything on this call would convince me anymore, I’d need to go back to developers and iterate.

MIH: To clarify my case: if EAO is asking what it would take for me to accept 1a or 3 something; no default trimming. The one that bothers me the most is where it decides to remove spaces for you.

USA: one thing that precludes us from making decisions, obvious much overlap. Multiple axes. Better to break this down into subproblems. Autotrimming, for example. Obviously a big thing but not sure how we can arrive at a complete conclusion without coming to an agreement about that.

MRR: Could we think about omitting the braces as an accelerator like a pro feature that we’re not all agreed on. So if we all agree on that then we could build on from there.

APP: We could, but it’d functionally be the same. So we end up with 4 options again. Mihai you’re right in that we need to include 2a. I’ll include an exploration on alternate sigils

EAO: I agree on sticking to this one topic until we figure it out.

MIH: If you look at 3a, if we do trimming by default, we would need to escape the sigil. We cannot take it piecemeal like that.

EAO: As we’re talking about having a further discussion on options that are developed from the current ones, like 1a and 3a and 2a as well. Is anyone interested in improving this syntax further to fix some of the deficiencies?

MIH: I’m not against removing the double curlies etc. If we have another way to enter code mode instead of curlies, that’s good but then we need to escape the sigil. Two open curlies require closing them. It feels wrong to not close opened brackets. Once you enter code mode, you stay in code mode.

APP: We’re going to iterate on the four options and bring them back to a vote.

EAO: Is there a timeline for this? 

APP: I will publish the PR before EOD today (Pacific time?) Comments are due by Wednesday. And when I publish a PR I’d establish a new voting issue or should we do it right there in the PR? I’m going to close the existing issue unless people object.


Topic: AOB?


