# 18 September 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)

**Scribe:** SCA

## Topic: Agenda Review

## What Happened in Seville?
_A summary of the various discussions and agreements. Pay particular note to:_
* https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki/Face%E2%80%90to%E2%80%90Face-Sevilla-Spain

Net result - significant progress on many blocking issues
Reopened discussion of starting in text mode.
Check out doc for list of discussions and decisions.


### Variable Mutability and Shared/Non-shared Namespace

Following examples use `$foo` as an external variable.

Original:
```
let $var = {$foo :something}
let $var = {$var :somethingElse vars=mutable}
```

New:
```
input {$foo :something}
local $var = {$foo :something}
local $var1 = {$var :other vars=immutable}
```

Notes:	

ECH can local declaration override input param? EAO 3 ways to have variables: 1) Input declaration - required parameter. 2) local variable declaration - can override passed in parameters. 3) no local or input variable declaration, values are implicitly looked up from external input parameters. 

STA Another way of phrasing it: local vars can only shadow implicit input vars; local vars cannot shadow explicit input vars nor other local vars.
Used, but not provided implicit references throw a runtime error
Input allows annotations of input parameters.

### "Markup" and Spannable

APP - key insight - term markup was misleading. Settled more on term “spannable”  - Three types, open ,closed, standalone.
Only allowed in placeholders. Can’t be put in a local variable, can’t select on it.  Format by default to an empty string. Is possible to create a function that outputs content in the same (way?)
Eg: using spannable for marking up translation annotation. Useful for providing non-rendering metadata(?)

STA - will be useful to have a complete list of use-cases that spanables are intended to solve.  May were discussed in Spain

### Starting in Text Mode
Original:
```
{Hello world!}

{Hello {$user}!}

{Hello {$user :annotation}!}

match {$count :number}
when 0 {You have no wildebeest}
when one {You have {$count} wildebeest}
when * {You have {$count} wildebeest}

input $foo :something
local $var = {$foo :somethingElse}
{Hello {$foo} from {$var}}
```

New:
_Syntax is still a work in progress–see lengthy discussion elsewhere._

```
Hello world!

Hello {$user}!

Hello {$user :annotation}!

#match {$count :number}
when 0 {You have no wildebeest}
when one {You have {$count} wildebeest}
when few {We have various options for handling pattern quoting}
when * {You have {$count} wildebeest}

#input {$foo :something}
#local $var = {$foo :somethingElse}
Hello {$foo} from {$var} is unquoted.
```

Notes:
Had some pushback on plain strings requiring curly brackets around them.  Makes normal strings not valid MF2 strings.
Starting with curly brackets - not adding significant value(?)
Handling of whitespace in resulting message. Discussion still in progress.

EAO - reasons for having demarcation around code is to preserve explicit whitespace. Please document cases where localizable and localized message requires leading or trailing whitespace. How do we communicate this to translators so that they do not inadvertently drop materially significant leading/trailing whitespace.

APP need to also ensure that unintended whitespace is not included

ECH - not stunned or amazed. Make sure that problems that we were considering as inputs to the code-first decision are still considered. Identification of pattern is considered key consideration.

MRR - agrees with direction 

SCA - let’s be consistent about explicit ways to switch into code mode, and when it ends.

MIH - escaping new lines followed by sigil-word, not always straightforward what is expected.

STA - What happens to newlines at end of sigil lines? How to be explicit about what will happen.

EAO -need real-world leading/ trailing whitespace use-case examples. Believe leading use-case is concatenation. Also description of how this is treated during translation to ensure whitespace is retained.

### Format-to-Parts
Notes:

EAO - definition is almost completely in line with shape of javascript (?) -  

MIH - tree format does not easily represent all desired structures. 

APP - Tree is misleading, only really a tree if nesting is required.  More appropriate to think of it as a sequence.

STA - discuss and agree if possibility of nesting parts is limited to 

EAO - will need to sort out details, but looking for general consensus that this approach is okay. 

APP - most useful to look at design docs to get context of discussion
Can ICU4J achieve structure specified in design doc?

MIH - issue is less technical, more would ICU board accept new way of doing things?

### Stability Policy
Notes:

APP need to develop stability policy. PR is in to attempt to do that.
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/472

### Other notes:
Reached agreement about eager vs lazy . Decided to avoid issue, allow both. Not require either. 
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/476

Proposed a logo. Unicode replacement character (U+FFFD) in curly quotes, seen on Seville page.

In person meeting was very successful.  We should do those more often!
2 full days, plus 2 half days.

EAO - started talking about DOM localization. Localize without going through javascript at all.  There is a DOM parts api.  Template instantiation is another name for this. The group there is designing a syntax that looks a lot like ours.  We should align / harmonize. https://github.com/WICG/webcomponents/blob/gh-pages/proposals/DOM-Parts.md
They’ve been working on this for 5 years. 

APP - express attributes use-cases - PR in to explore/ discuss
Talked about maybe going to W3CTAG (tech architecture group) in November to present.
Got a lot of outside feedback (and listened to it). Some is in discussions here, much happened in various discussions.  Not all documented in one place yet.

### Topic: Active PR review

### Topic: AOB?

ECH - Unicode is putting together the Unicode Technology workshop (UTW). Online events to have more of a reach and scope. Nov 7th and 8th, in person only, in the Bay area. https://blog.unicode.org/2023/08/unicode-technology-workshop-call-for.html
Hosted at Google Sunnyvale campus.

EAO - not too soon to start planning January meetup - Plenty of time to get in budgets.

(Action) APP will pull together a poll to decide dates. 

—--

Verbatim chat:

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bzYnq46HzBSEjznJi6f2IBNkMRJem11iz1ZmgvCZa3A/edit

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki/Face%E2%80%90to%E2%80%90Face-Sevilla-Spain

Stanisław Małolepszy: Another way of phrasing it: local vars can only shadow implicit input vars; local vars cannot shadow explicit input vars nor other local vars.

APP: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/474#issuecomment-1719431600

ECH: "well formed" vs. not well formed?
New York? :-)

APP: https://github.com/WICG/webcomponents/blob/gh-pages/proposals/DOM-Parts.md

ECH: https://blog.unicode.org/2023/08/unicode-technology-workshop-call-for.html

