### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)


Scribe: TIM


# Agenda:

## Topic: Markup PR 371

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/371

APP: I have a similar PR, 374, where we start to figure out how to fit this into the ABNF. https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/374 371, for me, is a good representation of making markup like a function, effectively., and not defining what it is. We discussed this previously; only sidebar is how to incorporate other sigils into the syntax. Any other observations?

EAO: Last time I think discussion left off with some sentiment that 371 is a decent direction for us to go; people might be reviewing it asynchronously, but not much has happened there, so I think we're where we left off – wanting to get feedback so we can merge

MIH: I read it, didn't leave comments, but two points. I'm happy with the way it is right now; not very excited about the whole thing eating two more sigils, but I can't come up with a better option. Second part is I was thinking about keeping things named placeholders that are not expressions. Our version has diverged from what localization industry wants; has become more like a programming language

EAO: My reason for agreeing with Stas's proposal to drop the placeholder and use `expression` is that the same construct we call "expression" both in the local variable declarations, in selectors, as placeholders in the message body. I agree that calling it a placeholder when it's within a message body is appropriate, but I don't really see a need for the syntax ABNF construct to be called "placeholder" when it's elsewhere. The alternative is we have a generic name like "expression" and call it a placeholder in the actual language of the spec, as I think is done in the text updates I used there. Or that e.g. we have two rules in the ABNF that look the same and are handled the same.

APP: I think that's fair; my observation is spec terminology and ABNF rule names should match as much as possible. I favor "placeholder" as the name of the thing that can occur inside a pattern. We have patterns in two kinds of places. I agree from the POV that an expression and a placeholder are not notably distinct once you get rid of the distinction between `markup` and `expression`. Interesting question about reserved sigils and how we incorporate them. That's a thing that's in my PR; basically the reserved sigils become labels for named items and they're indistinguishable from `function` in terms of their placement and how they can be decorated. The question is if that's appropriate or if we need to rewind a bit to allow named things to have other kinds of constructs behind them besides just `option` and so forth. I thought the interesting thing, Eemeli, in your PR was that you allow the reserved sigils to be followed by basically any non-quotable text. That would be interesting for a "comment" placeholder. I think it would be counterproductive for any kind of functional placeholder because it means that any un-reserving we did in the future would break existing parsers. We don't want to do that.

EAO: I think that's also a different discussion. 

MIH: For the name, I see nothing against calling them placeholders everywhere, including in the `let`. 

APP: except expressions can appear outside of placeholders

MIH: that's analogous to a placeholder - it's not an expression, still a placeholder and you use it analogously. I don't see it as a blocker to say it's a different thing.

EAO: As I intend the current language with 371 to come out, we have this syntax ABNF construct we call an "expression" b/c it has a certain shape with curly braces and this sort of thing in it. In the 3 different places where we use it, the thing we get out of it - all 3 have different names. Either used as a local variable definition variable, as a selector, or as a placeholder. The expression term here is just a generic term for all of this. This enables us to have separate terms for the 3 different ways in which the expression is used. I don't think it has to be encoded in the ABNF since the parser can always parse the expression the same way.

MIH: I find that convincing

APP: I think the ability to parse an expression consistently across is important. That's the right choice. I think the question is whether we define a bunch of different terms. In your PR (371) we have `function` being introduced by 3 different sigils. A different approach is to define different names for different sigil-introduced name tokens. We can say they function equivalently or differently as the case may be. So we can say things about + and - like they expect to be paired, or things of this nature. That's the kind of thing I think would be better than making everything a function with different sigils attached. The thought experiment is that if we introduce a different sigil, how do we break it apart, even though the parsing works the same. Here's a variable, decorated with a "blah" that's a function, or here's a function with some arguments and they're different flavors of those.

EAO: My intention was to make it minimally opinionated on this topic, not even giving a separate name for what is currently markup-start and markup-end. Happy to update it so we have a function and markup-start and markup-end

MIH: For me, they're all functions

APP: They may all be functions and work like functions, and they can have the same descriptive thing, but I suspect they should have different names. If they're just functions, 

(APP's connection froze)

EAO: Any other concerns about 371?

MIH: From my side, I'm happy as it is right now. I found your argument for selectors convincing; those are really not placeholders, makes sense to call them expressions. I'm not excited about the sigils, but can't imagine anything better.

APP: If they're just functions, why do we have 3 sigils for them?

MIH: I agree, that's where my uneasiness comes from, but I don't have a better way to represent it

APP: We could reserve sigils for markup functions but not define the functionality in the spec, e.g. whether they have to be paired, whether - has to come after +. We would just be reserving them. My tendency is to want to name them separately in the ABNF and then have spec text discuss how they're different and what could be done with them; even if that's the exact same thing. The pattern would then be repeated when we unreserve other sigils in the future.

EAO: One reason to not do that is that it kind of - if we have explicitly something like `markup-start` and `markup-end` as explicit constructs, we're implicitly saying that the standalone ':' function is something that's not markup. This leads up to: how do we need to represent something like an image or some other standalone element that's more like markup than a function? We would need an answer. But if we call all these things the same way, we don't need to have that discussion b/c they're all the same

APP: We could avoid the word "markup" in names. We've all been thinking of it as markup, but could call them something else.

MIH: I didn't want to call them "markup" and still don't want to. I think the difference is artificial. One of the things I can put as markup is a date picker, which when it's closed is a date, looks like a placeholder. Might get a date as an input from the developer. I put in a date and there'll be a date picker with a date I pass as a parameter. There's no difference between that and a date formatter type of thing. It's just rendered differently.

APP: Fair enough, but that can be done with the ':' placeholder

MIH: And I think it should be, but what's the difference between markup and the placeholder

APP: I would assume + and - could have additional semantics, at least in some implementations. We would want to provide something else.

MIH: For me they are identical. The plus and minus just say it's an open and close type of thing. That's why I'm not happy to have them as function sigils. I thought about: in the function registry you have to say types, standalone, open or closed. But then localization tool would have to understand the function registry. If you have +/-, if you implement the parsing then you can do certain kinds of validation w/o the function registry.

EAO: Sounds like we have something like consensus. At least in the previous meeting. We could merge 371 and then we're veering towards 2 other conversations: first, how do we reserve space in what is effectively placeholders, and second, what do we define of the function registry? That's really what we're talking about right now; defining what's implementation-dependent and what the spec provides. We haven't concluded that conversation yet; about whether we're only defining the structure of what the function registry looks like, or if we're providing a specific function registry as part of the spec. If we have nothing more to say on 371, can we +1 it and merge it and then move on to the other conversations?

APP: We could; my observation is that we probably should make some of those decisions. I think we don't know enough about the function registry. My suspicion is that it describes functions, because it's a function registry. Extensibility says people can add their own functions to it, but other types of constructs might not appear there. Or maybe it's misnamed. I think that's one question. If everything is a function, how do the other sigil-introduced names differ, from a syntactic point of view and from a functional point of view? Or do we want to reserve a different parsing space for different kinds of sigil-introduced named entities, and then allow them to have their own "blah" registry for whatever the other thing is?

EAO: Can we have this conversation after the 371 discussion, or does it actually need to impact what we're doing in 371 so much that we can't say our starting point is 371 and we build from there or possibly modify it further? Talking about reserved space would be easier after 371 is merged.

APP: We can do that. For me, the only thing in my mind is whether we call everything a function and then introduce the differences elsewhere, or if we have 3 different rules for named items b/c we have 3 different sigils. That's the only thing left that I'm uncomfortable with. Any objections to merging 371?

(No objections)

APP: OK, why don't we merge it and then argue about changes from there.

## Topic: Function Registry (continued)
Discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.

Deferred b/c Stas isn't here

## Topic: Reserve sigils for future use

* #360, #374

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/374

APP: Short version is, here's a list of sigils we will reserve for future use. PR 374 effectively is a play on 371 in which it says basically that all sigils are functions. And so they parse like functions and can appear like functions. When you un-reserve one, you have to describe what additional constraints can appear on them or what additional functionality appears on those, presumably something to do w/ function registry. In terms of parsing, they parse identically to `expression`. Alternative: introduce a higher-level construct around `expression` where `expression` is embedded for functions, but reserved-sigil things can have other syntax. Risk is: if you introduce new restrictions on what that content can be, you're breaking already-deployed parsers. I'm hesitant to do it unless we do it now. The one case that sprang to my mind looking at EAO's proposal is if you do a comment where what you want is free text.

MIH: What bothers me a little is the idea that we reserve all these sigils for functions only, which means we can't use them for the first part of the expression, the argument name or whatever. Right now we have a literal, maybe an nmtoken, and we have the '$' thing. Do we know for sure we're not going to want a '#' foo later or whatever.

APP: That is permitted, you're just not reading the second line of, I think, `expression`. What it does say is that the reserved placeholder can also appear in the function location. We would need to recast some things to disallow that if we didn't want reserved sigils to be non-introducers. If you look at 374, you can see that it appears in `annotation`. If you look, at the line above, you can see that `annotation` can start an `expression`. So any function can appear there. Any sigil thing can appear there. All this says is that it parses like a function does. The recasting would be to say that reserved ones parse specially, that they parse like `literal` and `variable` rather than like `function`.

MIH: So the annotation is the function name – in an expression we have `literal / variable` and the variable starts with '$', which means we can't have variables starting w/ one of the reserved things.

APP: We can; what we don't allow currently is nesting. What you can't have is '%'foo':'function, whatever. You can just have '%'foo`options`, but can't have '%''foo''function'. 

MIH: Is this allowed? `...{@foo :date }....`

APP: Not currently allowed, but we could make that change

EAO: I proposed something in a comment on 371… if we have the beginning of the expression, '{' and then one of the reserved sigils, any content can come after that so long as it doesn't include '}'/'{' or '|'. You can backslash-escape characters and can have paired curly braces, which may be parsed as escaped, and can have '|'-quoted literals within it. Should give a sufficiently large space to introduce the syntax that you're proposing, Mihai, and keep the parsing requirements of how to parse this reserved space unobstructed. If later we introduce a "{#" comment block, for backwards compatibility, inside the comment we would need to escape characters

APP: But that would already be known

EAO: Yes

APP: The challenge is, any syntactic restrictions we introduce into that content later won't be handled by existing parsers.

EAO: Yes, but that should all end up falling within the space that's reserved syntax in my proposal.

APP: It would, b/c there would be hardly any restriction. An old parser would parse that as sigil, "foo", don't understand the rest, but I collect all of it as basically a string inside the placeholder. Right? But it wouldn't know, it would just be opaque, what was inside that placeholder.

EAO: Yes, would be opaque to the old parser what's in the new reserved block.

APP: Which is to be expected. The question is, if we do it a different way there could be some structural parsing, even though the parser doesn't know what it means.

EAO: I'm confused-

APP: If we reuse `expression`, the parser would know where to find the pieces of the interior. But it would restrict what you could make the pieces of the interior; would be a limit to what you could do. The parser would return that to you in a structured way.

MIH: I was thinking, step back a little bit and wonder: what do we gain from all this, if we reserve all this? A parser can parse the unknown new syntax, an older parser, but then what? I can't use it, really, at runtime, because I've parsed it and don't know what to do within it anyway. That's the point: what's the benefit? It's useful, for instance- the way we have it now, I look at it and I know exactly that this is a string literal or a '$' something which is a variable, or a function name. That's good for localization. When you translate, I don't care what's inside the block, but it's good to know that it's "expiration date", end date, etc. As a translator that's useful for me. Once I get a block and have no idea what it is, that doesn't help me much. 

APP: Presumably an implementation that was using this would know what it was and could describe it

MIH: I just wonder, what's the benefit of having a parser that supports future things. Ok, I have an old parser in my localization tool, you give me a new message, I won't explode I don't know what it is, will treat it as a black-box but I have zero smartness about it. 

APP: Whatever it is would be opaque

EAO: Main benefit is it gives us space to consider the possibility later of doing something like a MessageFormat v2.1. A new release of the spec w/ some new features that doesn't break existing parsers. For example, if we introduce the '@' for global variables of some sort, so you could have '@foo:date` and `@foo` would come from some global scope, if we wanted to introduce that and didn't have the reserved space in the spec, all of the stuff that works in 2.0 will break. So whatever we release after that has to be 3.0. If we have the reserved space and we start using it, we can call that 2.1 and not 3.0.

APP: Not just that, but remember that strings don't identify what version number they are. Lots of people will have strings, if you start using the new features, you won't have tools going "I don't understand what this is, but it's reserved, so I won't throw it away or complain that it's not well-formed. It's not valid to me, but it is well-formed".

EAO: The way I would put it: it improves our fallback behavior if we decide later to apply further changes.

APP: But it also restricts us - we can never do anything that this syntax doesn't describe, except to narrow it. We can say '@' no longer accepts just `nmtoken`, it now accepts an option bag.

EAO: And then we would need to give a major semver bump to MessageFormat 3; then anything's possible. Does anyone else have any opinions about reserving sigils for future use.

ECH: I think it's OK. There were workarounds necessary for the JS regex syntax, whether it supported Unicode-style properties or not; in their updates – maybe there was a reserve that you could add a letter indicator flag, and they're taking advantage of that. I think it's good for just-in-case.

APP: I think, Eemeli, I'm convinced by your arguments about making an opaque box, so I'll adjust my PR to be similar to your proposal. I'll sit down and make it clean. Then I think we should consider that in our next call for merging. Or decide that we hate it. and then we'll need to do the text that goes with it in the spec.

MIH: So you mean - curly, sigil, then opaque box?

APP: So we should have that discussion. Is it a named item followed by opaque text? Or is it that we see one of these and then everything until the next unquoted curly bracket is opaque?

EAO: So we could have something like a `:foo` with options and then it's followed by `@| = thing`, which would currently be an error, or are you saying we would reserve that for future use?

APP: Is the sigil always attached to a name? Or just, after me, before whatever the next token separator is, is opaque? I think it wants to be attached to a name. 

MIH: I think if it's not attached to a name, it's not a sigil anymore. That's how I've seen it in a lot of places

APP: What if it's a comment, and the comment looks like `{# this is a comment}`? There's no name there

MIH: Just saying, I don't think that's called "sigil" anywhere I've seen

APP: If we reserved and then we unreserved octothorpe for the purpose of a comment, is that valid or do you have to have a name?

MIH: I would like for this to be valid

APP: So any of the reserveds could be followed by whitespace

EAO: So we could have an optional name. Could have something like a '#' and then a comment, and the name would be empty.

APP: Let me think about how to form them…

MIH: the more I think about it, the less I like it

EAO: Need an updated PR to have proper followup

APP: And the spec text needs to be updated; I will do that

EAO: Including an update to the formatting fallback section

APP: Which in this case would be: emit everything you see that you don't recognize

EAO: That's different from what we have in the fallback currently. But let's discuss this when we have the actual proposal

APP: OK

MIH: I'm almost tempted to say that this is just adding complications w/ no big benefits. We can do pretty much everything here with the existing stuff. A comment could be a function. I register and I say "translation note" or whatever and put it with an '=blah' or whatever

APP: You can, but you can't nest them

MIH: I think it's not necessarily a good idea to nest them. Imagine what you do as a translator or translation tool with nested things. It's just complicating things

APP: I'm not sure comments are a good idea either. Just bringing it up as a test case. Let's do the PR and then we'll come back and re-examine

## Topic: Allow `name` to start with a digit
* #350

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/350

APP: Had a long thread about it in the PR; I proposed allowing a name to start with a number, which we don't currently do

EAO: My preference: it seems like it makes stuff complicated and a little weird, we should do the XML thing of adding an '_' as prefix if we need to

MIH: To summarize, I added some comments, but my take is also that we shouldn't. We are just adding complications. Now what happens if you have a mix of named and non-named arguments; it's becoming a mess

APP: What complication are we adding? We're adding `digit` to the production

MIH: But a digit means a positional argument

APP: It doesn't have to; that's one use case. They could just as easily have a name like "1911-??", one of those strings like we see in BCP 47 sometimes. It's a variable name that starts with a number. Might be all digits, might be anything that's in an `nmtoken`. Why is that more complicated? We don't support numeric arguments at all currently. We do support named arguments, and if the names happen to be numbers and you created those numbers by casting argument order in an object array, good for you. That's probably not the right thing, but we're not here to prevent people from using the code the way they want to.

EAO: I think the existing state of the world has made it relatively easy with existing prior systems to use positional arguments and therefore have names that start with numbers. This has led actively to difficulties in identifying, what is '$1'? What is '$3'? And yes, there are use cases, but these use cases are way rarer than the bad use cases that we tend to see a lot of. Making them slightly more difficult by needing to use an underscore would drive adoption of better practices.

APP: And when people don't understand why their code doesn't work, why they have to do the underscore or whatever?

MIH: Because that's what variable names are in all programming languages?

APP: Not necessarily true

EAO: Mostly true

MIH: It's mostly true

APP: Scripting languages are not like that necessarily. A lot of our people are scripting UI

MIH: Can I do `var 123 = "hello world"`?

APP: In most programming languages, the problem with it being a number is that it parses as a number type. But lots of data has values that appear as numbers, or fields that appear as numbers.

MIH: If I think about the translator side, that would be confusing for a translator. If I see '$4', it is a positional argument. I don't care about the spec, as a translator I don't know, I see 50 syntaxes every single day from different companies, I see '$5' and it's a positional argument

APP: How does the underscore fix that?

MIH: The underscore, it's a variable name

APP: Have you met translators lately?

MIH: I'm not saying the underscore is a good thing. I've even seen validation tools that look for stuff like that. I agree, there are bad tools, but they are out there. I don't think what it gives us outweighs the disadvantages. It's not like we can't make it work.

EAO: Related discussion: Allowing local variable definitions to overrule or reuse a name given externally. One thing positional arguments do allow you to do is: you just pass in an array of stuff and on the localization side, you map those positional arguments to some names and that's what you give to translators. That's how the web extension localization system works. On the developer side, what they feed in as arguments are positional, in the message itself, you can have a metadata block where you define mappings between names and positional arguments. What I raised earlier about redefining an externally-provided variable in local declarations allows us to have two different names. Suppose we have a `date` variable coming in, in a local variable declaration, we want to define some options to use when formatting that date. Now we need both the name of the externally-given argument that goes into the value of the date, as well as the name of the local variable we're using further on in the message. Spec text currently says they need two different names. If we change it so we can override, then we would only have one name. But this is a different discussion

MIH: I don't think this relates to the digit part. We can say local variables can override the input stuff. Separate discussions

EAO: Related in my head

APP: I'm trying to reduce the mental overhead for users as much as we can. I think the more arcane we make things, the more of a tripping hazard there is. I do think the positional argument one is interesting simply b/c people have a ton of code in the world that already uses positional. This is a way they don't have to change their code to adopt our formatter. If we want to say that – if we want to build in a feature to support that, that would be where you have to use an underscore and that's fine. This is potentially a way to get around that. I'm more concerned about – I don't want to think too much about what I can put into the name of a variable. It can even be generated by code from data values over which people may not have much control. Generally will be ASCII but the ASCII can include numbers. That's where I'll stop. We should get a sense for where people are at. Eemeli and Mihai, I think you're both in the 'reject' camp.

EAO: Even where we would currently require an '_' prefix, we're allowing the possibility for a runtime implementation to see that it's not getting a bag of named options but rather an array of options. There is a pathway there for an implementation to enable old code to not need any updates.

APP: Outside the scope of what we're defining. We can recommend that.

EAO: Or we can note that that's a possibility. I'm saying that by not allowing a digit, we're not blocking that sort of an implementation from being written

APP: Yes, but nothing currently blocks that either

TIM: agree with disallowing them

ECH: I think I've seen programming languages disallow having a digit begin an identifier

RGN: there's a Unicode TR that aligns with that

APP: I think we have consensus on this; I'll close 350 as not acceptable

## Planning

APP: Next call in two weeks – April 24
