2023-02-13 | MessageFormat WG (replaces 2023-02-20 call)

### 2023-02-13 Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt O’Conor - Bloomberg (MOC)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## Agenda for 2023-02-06

#### Topic: Agenda Review

#### Topic: Info Share
ECH: Updated ICU user guide

SCL and STA continue working on FAQ

APP shared a doc on CLDR edits. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vFPGgppCvLl_7KgYUER1qatjHz1Zwm5oL2feZRzeXjA/edit - Looking for feedback on edits by Friday

#### Topic: Action Item Review
APP: working on guidance for questioning tech decisions. Will respond to question in github

#### Topic: Whitespace handling in EBNF
Discussion required for Unblocking STA

STA: Are we happy with the flavor of EBNF
STA: Whitespace definition in spec is not clearly defined
STA: looking for EBNF with better tooling support for validation, syntax error reporting. IETF BNF - possible candidate.  APP says there are good tools available. Other parts of Unicode are using W3C EBNF.
No strong preference in the call. MIH will work with STA to identify validation tool availability.

STA will select an implementation.

MIH link to REX Parser generator : https://www.bottlecaps.de/rex/

STA: LL1 parsers not very expressive. Hard to express whitespace rules.  “LL1 With backtracking” a possibility. Or not be explicit about whitespace in grammar. Can reject whitespace errors on tokenization step. 

EAO: We are LL1 right now with MF1

APP: we currently do not permit the whitespaces that we all include in our messages. 

STA: Proposal drop the strict LL1 Requirement. Go with LL1 with backtracking. 

MIH : there is a LL1 with backtracking implementation in ECMA script

EAO: whitespace should be lenient outside of patterns. CR, NL, tab, space

APP: possible to differentiate between single ling whitespace and multiline whitespace

EAO: happy to let NL NL token allowed, hard to prevent, not worth the effort

STA: Do we need WS between \*\*? Yes. MIH: We want spaces between keys. 

EAO: Can fix in editor, or on export step.

ECH: consistency is important for reducing cognitive overhead. Strictness is ok as long as it is consistent. Have at least one space between values.

EAO: Using parenthesis is a corner case, why add rules to make it special.

STA: Will use LL1 With backtracking..  Will pick a BNF

#### Topic: 2119 keyword PR
Requested by: APP

APP: Added 2119 to syntax.md. Do we make syntax.md the spec or create a new container? 

EAO: Syntax is ‘chapter 1’. More to come about other parts of the spec. Everything in the spec folder should be part of the official spec, but breaking into files is valuable.

#338


#### Topic: (Pull Request) Add Pattern Selection
Requested by: EAO
#333
EAO: As a result of CLDR RC  how do we have conversations about revisiting technical choices. Ie: text-first or code-first.

APP: Formal way to oppose decisions. Working group can choose to take it up, or reject it as ‘settled’. Default position in ‘no change’

MIH: Best match vs first match. Going with first match throws away some backward compatibility with MF1

EAO: should be possible to deterministically map an MF1 messenger to MF2.

EAO: Would like to agree on how we have conversations before we have the conversations. What is needed to re-open a given conversation.

APP: I owe the group a document why relying on the ordering of variants is a bad idea.

STA: There is a doc from CLDR-TC, any incompatibility issues can be solved with tooling. 

APP: I’m sensitive to the audience of people who will use this because relying on order of variants will be really confusing and difficult to use.

STA: Best match requires function or documentation inspection, first match is more intuitive.

MIH: Whatever is implemented in ICU4J doesn’t mean it is the group’s agreed final consensus. We needed to make compromises to make the deadline for the technical preview implementation.

MIH: I am not saying that we are required to be fully compatible with MessageFormat 1.0, but once we try to 

ECH: We should not lose the thread concerning the algorithm on how we match tuple cases for each variant within the selection. That point might inform best-match vs. first match. The notion of matching is not equality, the notion of equality depends on identity and can differ depending on what we're dealing with. If we take a MF1 message and try to convert it, what is doing the conversion between the semantics of MF1 and MF2? Would require additional tooling in order scale.

EAO: There seems to be 3 related discussions here: 1) APP to describe why best match is strongly preferable to first match; 2) ECH says the spec should be more specific on having an abstraction/interface for the matching logic to be specific to the selector type; 3) updating the spec text.

APP: The way EAO's PR is setup is to have the selector to determine its output. If we invert this, the inputs and various when statement. If we write in terms of the match statement rather than in terms of then when statement, it will decouple us from some of the weirdness around plurals. Even for first match, plural will not produce "1" or "ONE" 

EAO: It ends up impacting the structure of how selection works.

APP: The selector must produce the output as opposed to the when.

STA: In EAO's PR we will first resolve the expressions in the match line, not to concrete values like "1" or "ONE" it will resolve to selector interface. The selector interface has a method that takes the 'when' key. Selector's should be greedy and consume all 'when' clauses.

APP: If you were doing best match, then you would be processing all of the variants and return a boolean or a score, and then choose the best value from the result set.

STA: Unclear on where score is recorded and which score is best.

ECH: I don't think my points have been addressed. I can clarify if needed. Plurals may be quirky but are also very common. Formatting has to happen with numbers, can also be called pre-processing depending on the terminology or context. This isn't enough to match. A formatted to parts number won't match "ONE" 

STA: This is the point of the EAO's spec. We wanted to ensure plurals can be implemented as custom functions. We're able to express this nuance in Javascript. 

APP (chat): Here is what the current PR says:
      1. Let _sel_ be the entry in _res_ at position _i_.
      2. Let _pass_ be the boolean result of testing _key_ against _sel_.

ECH: An interface will allow us to decouple the implementation and this hasn't been specified in the PR yet. 

STA: This goes against our runtime specification.

ECH: I agree with the intention but it is non-obvious, unseen. 

STA (chat): Right, and an implementation for that can be: if (sel.match(key)) ..., where both sel and key are some runtime types that can match and be formatted, respectively

ECH (chat): and `match()` is the interface that we need to define. and it is intertwined with the selector value type (and in the case of plurals, depends on the selector value type's formatter's output)

MIH: A source of confusion is how we're thinking about result values. You call a function and get a result value. The result could also be an object. We cannot be backwards compatible with MF1. We can do MF1 sort of thing by sorting. This is outside of the purview of message format, the function knows how to sort. We can look at individual values and return a score. MF1 runtime is doing the sorting. Can we write a custom function that implements plural matching the MF1 semantics in the MF2 engine? 

EAO: I would like to include in the spec the things that ECH is asking for but have also tried not to include it. This has caused controversy in the past. It would facilitate understanding and clear communication. Explicitly define the interface for what is the value of a local variable. How do we communicate to readers what is happening? In ICU4J there is a formatted number structure, what is the plural category of this number?

APP: Interface of matcher returns a boolean or returns a score

EAO: We should find acceptable language to build a spec so implementations can be written. Should we find a representation for what is the value of a local variable? We need to be able use these in another matcher. We should clearly define these interfaces.

EAO: For MF1 compatibility, we see a two phase operation. There is a separate module from MF2 runtime which is able to take MF1 syntax and produces a MF2 data model representation. This includes the step of sorting and full visibility for all keys. Not able to do what MIH describes. Reordering doesn't break compatibility of MF1 with MF2.

STA: Thought we didn't want to specify what a selector looks like because of implementation differences. Confused how far we should take the normalization of the spec. Also confused about how best-match could work. Understood that sorting would take place at migration time, not runtime. 

ECH: I would hope the interfaces would allow you to not specify the types. You don't know what you will get from pre-processed value. Sometimes preprocessing includes locale information. 

APP: we can write a spec that is agnostic about many of these things. Would like to understand better when EAO is getting at. Given a selector and a set of whens and a set of inputs, we get a result, either a string or error. We should try to accomplish this goal. 

MIH: Should we meet specifically on this topic?

APP: I agreed to separate out a separate topic from this PR into a separate PR. In the process of reviewing this PR, there are technical considerations that should be filed as a separate issue.

EAO: I will turn the PR into a draft. And we should have a new issue to represent what the logic of the best match algorithm.

MIH (chat): There is already a best match issue: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/271

APP: I want to prefer followup via PRs because PRs provide specifics on the technical details and a place for reviewers to point if they disagree and a chance to explain why.

### Sidebar discussion from Chat

Addison
9:29 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Kf7xj5deR8v_jswvugISDGdBMOIuVTHWu1fZHSdLjII/edit

Addison
9:36 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Kf7xj5deR8v_jswvugISDGdBMOIuVTHWu1fZHSdLjII/edit

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
9:37 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Kf7xj5deR8v_jswvugISDGdBMOIuVTHWu1fZHSdLjII/edit

Addison
9:44 AM
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3AAction-Item

Addison
9:46 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vFPGgppCvLl_7KgYUER1qatjHz1Zwm5oL2feZRzeXjA/edit

Addison
9:54 AM
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/342

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
9:58 AM
From the URL above: **Command line client** Use REx.java instead of this form for invoking REx from a command shell.
Direct link: https://www.bottlecaps.de/rex/REx.java

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:00 AM
https://www.bottlecaps.de/rex/

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:04 AM
WhiteSpace ::= #x9 | #xD | #xA | #x20 /\* ws: definition \*/

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:06 AM
Literal ::= '(' (LiteralChar | LiteralEscape)* ')' /\* ws: explicit \*/

Addison
10:13 AM
when \* (foo)(bar)
when \* (foo) (bar) has 3 but \*(foo)(bar) has one?

Staś Małolepszy
10:19 AM
Shoud this be invalid? {$foo :func opt=(value)opt=value}

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:23 AM
> Shoud this be invalid? {$foo :func opt=(value)opt=value} yes (my opinion)

Addison
10:23 AM
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/338
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/333

Matt O'Conor
10:37 AM
Are you scribing Elango?
Don't want to step on each other's toes

Elango Cheran
10:38 AM
i'm helping
it helps to leapfrog with 2 scribes. and it results in better coverage

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:46 AM
Two levels for "best match" vs "first match": A. "per column" ``` match {$count, :plural} when * {....} when one {....} when 1 {....} ``` B. Between rows ``` when 1 * when one masculine ```
If we do first match on A, that is horribly bad, and not MF1 compatible
Doing first match for B is OKish

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:54 AM
In other words what I think Addison is saying: ``` switch ( function(val) ) { case A: .... case B: .... default: } ``` Vs: if ( function ( val, A ) ) .... elsif ( function ( val, B ) ) .... else .... ````

Addison
11:00 AM
Here is what the current PR says: 1. Let _sel_ be the entry in _res_ at position _i_. 2. Let _pass_ be the boolean result of testing _key_ against _sel_.

Staś Małolepszy
11:01 AM
Right, and an implementation for that can be: if (sel.match(key)) ..., where both sel and key are some runtime types that can match and be formatted, respectively

Elango Cheran
11:03 AM
^ and `match()` is the interface that we need to define. and it is intertwined with the selector value type (and in the case of plurals, depends on the selector value type's formatter's output)

Addison
11:04 AM
+1

Staś Małolepszy
11:04 AM
Elango, I'd like to define it, but I was under the impression that we didn't want to be that specific. Hence the wording in the PR: "result of testing key against sel"
What is we say "match() is required" -- is it normative? Why can't my plural function be a black box, as we've always wanted?

Elango Cheran
11:07 AM
it's something that Markus was repeating a bit during the meetings he attended, so there is a desire to specify. again, i don't think we should describe the _types_ of the pre-processing, but we could have have an interface for the function that returns that pre-processed value. and at least, we should define the interface for functions for selection logic

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:11 AM
What I would like to see is: message format 2 syntax + "custom plural" => mf 1 behavior

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:18 AM
"Explain how to implement select "best match" with custom functions #271" https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/271

Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
11:25 AM
Also: "Make it clear which functions are formatting functions and which are selection functions blocker-candidate " https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/260
Which is Elango's concern, i think


