14 August 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference
Attendees:
Please fill “attendee” block with your name, affiliation and a 3-letter acronym for the scribe to use (see examples in “previous attendees”):

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)

Scribe: MIH

## Topic: Agenda Review

(no additions requested)

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: Browser extensions considering adopting MF2.
EAO: there is interest from Apple and Mozilla for a localisation file format for extension l10n, that supports MF2.

## Topic: Action Item Review

[ ] +/- comparison (addison)

APP: In progress with STA https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IHODjPLh_b2pcZlH3KbAdIMXniGKLFzIv_LWsrO9R0E/edit?resourcekey=0-EilhrcWYrQ90N632fB8mGg#heading=h.frldpg1ui9ww

## Topic: F2F Planning

Everybody is going to Seville, right? Here’s who I have so far:

- Addison
- Eemeli
- Mihai
- Stas

Regrets: Ujjwal

## Topic: Active PR review

(Discussed table in agenda; merged one)

## Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues

- Currently we have 70 open (was 72 last time).
- 0 are resolved-candidate and proposed for close.
- 6 are Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.

Synopsis of #425: This has a really long thread. There is a subsidiary issue (#433) about what we name the default selector (:string, :select, or :equals). A key issue in this thread is whether formatters can also be selectors and, if so, what the default selector is for a given function (e.g. is the default for :number the equivalent of :plural). We previously settled that selectors MUST have an annotation.

Recommendation: Suggest closing this issue in favor of tasks to build the list of default registry functions, including information about which formatters are also selectors (see my comment in the issue for details).

Synopsis of #375: This is a list of tasks that remain on "markup" (open/close) support. The only open issue in this set of tasks is #262 ("Do markup elements map to registered functions?"). One answer might be "yes", but we are engaged in discussions of open/close syntax which might bring changes here.

Recommendation: I think we should actually close both issues. Changes from our discussion of open/close can result in new, targeted issues.

(Intro, status updates)

Selection method expectations
#425
Need a document summarizing what we need and what to include in the registry.
Start with capabilities (requirements).
Then discuss what the options are.
Maybe 3 categories: what we must include, we would like to, and we don’t include in 2.0.

What's left to discuss on markup?
#375
The last comment contains a list of items contributed by cdaringe.
Do we want to capture them in separate issues?
Topic: How to express expression locale?
See #426

EAO: locale is something that we treat differently.
Can put it on functions, or as a separate item in the syntax.

APP: thoughts
A given patten string might result in something that is in a different locale.
And the runtime locale might not match the environment.
Examples: fallbacks (we translate into 1 lang, not all the variants)

Other use case: specific locale in an expression only.

Last one: something you can set on the whole message. Another one that Amazon used was timezone.

EAO: the use case I give is a fragment that is in a different language than the rest of the message.

APP:

```
you say 'yes' in French as <em lang=fr>oui</em>
```

EAO:
Could also have:

```
{In French, "{|bonjour| @locale=fr}" is a greeting}
```

Or

```
{In French, "{|bonjour| @locale=fr @canCopy=true}" is a greeting}
```

MIH in chat :-:
Why not:

```
{In French, "{|bonjour| @canCopy=true :string locale=fr }" is a greeting}
```

EAO in chat:

```
{In French, "{|bonjour| :string @locale=fr}" is a greeting}
```

APP: one way to look at it is the @locale is a function parameter, but it is a special, reserved one.

MIH: things that might be placeholder (expression?) attributes, independent of functions and registry.
Locale, id, direction, canCopy & Co?
Even if we don’t specify them all in 2.0, are they enough to make a case for non-function attributes?

APP:

```
"@" name "=" unquoted-literal
```

EAO:

```
@locale=$foo
```

Will have a proposal (EAO?)

Topic: Sigils, immutability, naming… but mainly open/close processing

1:1 Addison / Stas, a summary:

Syntactically open / close they are meaningless.
Data model: again, does not care about open / close
Function registry: we start to use open / close
Behavior / functionality: we should start to specify what they do

Alternative: make them syntactically meaningful.
For example can’t have an open/close flag in a selector.
Maybe force pairing (becomes syntactically checkable)

Why we didn’t want to force pairing: segmentation, and there are tagging systems what are don’t correctly paired.

STA: there are many things that are not specified (can these flags be overridden between local variables and use).

APP: we already have a pretty long list of features and use cases.
Probably no html for 2.0.

AOE: https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-messageformat/blob/next/README.md#message-markup
This is what he will soon propose.
In that proposal you need an extra step that happens after format to parts. Because (for example) you need access to the text between placeholders to build a DOM, but functions don’t have access to that.

STA: one of the main reasons for open / close is tooling, especially in the tools that don’t have access to the registry.

AOE: the proposal to tc39 is that the registry does not care about the registry. The work happens above Intl.MessageFormat.

## Topic: AOB?

Link Farm:
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/310#issuecomment-1646670556

https://docs.google.com/document/d/13JVPTuhs_SJXWcsSpjFWNIVk3o-T1DQI30RX0qyeK5k/edit

A Matrix of Open/Close/Standalone Properties

—

(telecon chat captured verbatim)

```
You
9:30 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jbtfnlk7W0egNoFA4UCDJEoBcy2aFNFqw95lQ6LrSyI/edit
You
9:32 AM
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jbtfnlk7W0egNoFA4UCDJEoBcy2aFNFqw95lQ6LrSyI/edit
Eemeli Aro
10:08 AM
https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-messageformat/blob/next/README.md#message-markup
You
10:29 AM
"you say 'yes' in French as <em lang=fr>oui</em>"
Eemeli Aro
10:36 AM
Could also have: {In French, "{|bonjour| @locale=fr}" is a greeting}
Eemeli Aro
10:38 AM
{In French, "{|bonjour| @locale=fr @canCopy=true}" is a greeting}
Eemeli Aro
10:42 AM
{In French, "{|bonjour| :string @locale=fr}" is a greeting}
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:44 AM
then why not thisL
{In French, "{|bonjour| @canCopy=true :string locale=fr }" is a greeting}
local is a normal parameter of the function
You
10:45 AM
{$title @locale=title.lang}
You
10:48 AM
HTML does inherit, but **we** do not have spanning
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:49 AM
TLDR, why {In French, "{|bonjour| :string @locale=fr}" is a greeting} and not {In French, "{|bonjour| :string locale=fr}" is a greeting}
You
10:50 AM
"language priority list"
Mihai ⦅U⦆ Niță
10:53 AM
Android spannable has LocaleSpan https://developer.android.com/reference/android/text/style/LocaleSpan
Eemeli Aro
11:05 AM
"@" name "=" unquoted-literal
You
11:06 AM
@locale=$foo
```
