Mar 13, 2023 | MessageFormat WG Teleconference

### Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
Tim Chevalier (TIM)

Previous Scribe was: ECH

### Agenda

Topic: Agenda Review
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/meetings/agenda.md
Notes Document for The Upcoming Call
https://docs.google.com/document/d/17X6BPvHdjI_Twuy2vcbtVjxKAYTi5eUTZpJl9qUGzjM/edit

### Agenda for 2023-03-13
* Topic: Agenda Review
* Topic: Info Share
* Topic: Action Item Review
* Topic: Closing the book on matching
* Topic: Function Registry
* Topic: Markup
* Topic: Determining MF1 compatbility

#### Proposed for Future (or if time permits)

Topic: Bidi

Requested by: EAO

Discussion of bidirectional text handling. See:
#315

Topic: (Discussion) Guidance needed for dealing with selector explosions

Requested by: STA

#323

Topic: Reserve sigals for future use

Requested by: APP

#360

Topic: Allow name to start with a digit

Requested by: APP

#350

---

## Notes


### Info Share

SCL: I did an audit of all of our message handling needs, and comparing that to MF 2.0. It turns out that MF 2.0 handles all of our needs.

### Function Registry (continued)

STA: I have created a [draft PR for a registry specification](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/368).

APP: It is important to discuss what level of normativity this is defining. Is it just a specification for describing functions, or does it also indicate which specific parts of functionality are required. For example, our discussion about matching has alternatives that reference the necessity for functionality to come from the function registry.

STA: Currently, I have only thought about the description of functions, but higher-level requirements can be added later iteratively.

STA: The signature of a function has one or more signatures, and the signature can be differentiated by locale.

APP: One of the things we warn people about is having to change their message strings around when the locale changes.

STA: A few other things that I want to point out. For an option to a function, the `values` attribute indicates which enumerated set of values are allowed. Another way to validate is using the `pattern` attribute, which references a regular expression that describes the string provided 

APP: We’ll take feedback directly on the PR, which also gives time for others to have a chance to take a look first.


### Closing the book on Selection Matching

APP: I have updated [the document](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/aphillips-issue-351/exploration/selection-matching-options.md). Where we left off is a slight preference towards column-first matching.

SCL: I am reasonably okay with any option. One statement that I made last time that I want to revise after talking with people in our company is who is responsible for crafting messages. For our workflows, the developer will draft a message, but it goes to the content management team to be edited to support our workflows. Our

EAO: What does your company’s team 

SCL: Because we don’t have a lot of need for selection messages, I prefer the first-match strategy because it’s easier.

MIH: The thing I don’t understand about the support for first-match is who is supposed to be doing the sorting?

SCL: It is not about first-match being easy to understand rather than it being easy to explain to non-technical people.

STA: I’m in the first-match camp because it is more predictable to know what a message returns when I see it. However, the segmentation concerns for messages is compelling. For first-match, I feel like tooling could be used to sort the messages automatically, so that means we could combine the options.

EAO: How much tooling can we assume to exist?

APP: I think we should start by assuming that no tooling will exist.

EAO: Should we then assume that absolutely no tooling will exist?

APP: The less we depend on tooling, the better.

MIH: In many cases, it will be hard to write proper tooling. If we have registry functions written in one programming language, and validation checks written in another programming language.

ECH: I didn’t understand the comment about combining the first-match solution with tooling to automatically sort variants. If you have tooling to do so, then you should just go for a best-match strategy since the ordering requirement of first-match is just added complexity.

EAO: If we require a solution that works with no tooling, then I prefer the first-match solution, since it doesn’t require extra tooling to implement. My understanding of no tooling means that we should be prepared for a situation in which translators will see source message string directly.

APP: There are different levels of tooling. One level of tooling can be minimal that just validates translated message syntax, or validation that for plural messages that have variants besides other in Japanese, they can be eliminated because Japanese has no plural variants besides other. Another level of tooling could be used to expand a plurals selection message based on the plural categories for the target language.

EAO: What is the primary audience for tooling, then?

MIH: About tooling, we should expect a minimal level tooling, such as validating just basic syntax (ex: XML syntax validation), even if it doesn’t understand your own semantics layered on the syntax (ex: your flavor of XML).

I still have a problem with the argument for requiring the developer to sort the messages. If you have the ability to validate or lint messages at build time using ordering rules, then you have the ability to order things at runtime. So why not just use the tooling at runtime in a best-match strategy?

STA: About tooling, the safest assumption is to assume the same level of tooling for current MF2.0. I also didn’t understand why there is a distinction between required `*` and optional `*`. I get concerned about the idea in the best-match approach that messages are selected by a transformation that is doing filtering 

EAO: I introduced the distinction between required and optional `*`. My thought was that fist-match requires sorting of variants, and that requires developers/translators to refer to the registry to know how to sort, and that can be difficult, so I thought that this could only work if we relax the constraint that the default case `*` is required.

ECH: I want to remind everyone that we are not reducing complexity in these options. The inherent complexity remains the same. What we’re talking about is making one thing easier at the cost of putting the burden on other work. First-match wants the communication between developers and content managers to be easier in explaining how to understand selection messages, but it requires the developers and translators to know the same algorithm and apply them manually, effectively becoming human computers. We might say that the plural selector is something that people can learn, but what about custom formatters that come with their own selectors? How do we expect translators to know how values for those selectors should be sorted? I think the decision about ordering values compared by a selector function should be encoded when creating the selector function. It makes sense to encode that information by the people who know it best.

EAO: I think the burden on developers of having to know how selectors would be light.

APP: Remember that you have ChoiceFormat. That is tricky, where a numerical input might test against intervals for inclusion. This is a formatting type that exists in the real world and has real world use cases, for example knowing which shopping product to display.

STA: I’m starting to think differently about this. ECH is right that we’re shifting complexity around. I was optimizing for debuggability, but that is not necessarily optimizing for developers/translators. Maybe it is better to just focus on debugging of a single message. Maybe it is better to surrender the decision of which message is chosen to the selector that knows how to sort keys. Among best-match, I prefer the option that uses scoring the most. I have a concern about fuzzy matches versus exact matches.


MIH: I feel what APP said did a good job of explaining of what I tried but haven’t been able to, which is that you have to separate the per-selector matching & sorting algorithms from the overall matrix / key tuples selection algorithm.

Regarding the point about debuggability and wanting to understand things, developers are already used to using libraries and algorithms without knowing the exact implementation details.

STA: I am concerned about the 

EAO: I am still very resistant to using an approach that uses scoring.

MIH: For me, scoring is an implementation detail.

ECH: I want to point out that in the ideal case, if the full space of inputs is covered by all of the selector value key tuples in the matrix, then the ideal best tuple will always win in any of the best-match approach. In the document example, if the input values are `1`, `1`, `1`, then the selector tuple `=1 =1 =1` will be matched over anything else like `one one one`, etc. The ideal variant will be selected in either of the best-match algorithms (column-first or best-score).  So what we’re talking about here is not what happens in the ideal case, but what happens when the matrix / tuple space is underspecified. So what we’re looking at for cases that are underspecified is providing a best effort result. The best-match algorithms differ by whether it is a greedy algorithm or a global scoring algorithm, but they are still just providing a best effort answer.

EAO: My reference point for the scoring approach is CSS, which uses a scoring algorithm, but I bet that no one knows what it is. What happens as a result is you introduce the syntax `!` to indicate that something is important. I am afraid that something like that would evolve.

APP: Scoring would allow a later column to jump the ordering of variants created by an earlier column’s ordering.

STA: I used the same argument of CSS last week to argue against best-match scoring. But maybe that MF2.0 would not be as bad as CSS because we don’t have the same level of options and depth. I was against best-match last week, but I am leaning towards it because what ECH said about “best effort” made it click in my mind. I was thinking that best-match was always returning the best match, but if we think about it instead as meaning “best effort”, then the best-match idea makes sense, and I am leaning towards it.

APP: What are everyone’s preferences now?
…
Based on what everyone said, it seems like there is a rough consensus on some type of best-match algorithm, but we are still undecided between column-first and best-score. It would help to have running code for column-first, and for best-score.


