22 May 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference
Attendees:
Please fill “attendee” block with your name, affiliation and a 3-letter acronym for the scribe to use (see examples in “previous attendees”):

### Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
Eemeli Aro (EAO)
Ujjwal Sharma (UJJ)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
Romulo Cintra - Igalia (RCA)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)



### Previous Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Eemeli Aro (EAO)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
Romulo Cintra - Igalia (RCA)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
Ujjwal Sharma (UJJ)
Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: 
Previous Scribe: Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
# Agenda:

### Topic: Agenda Review

STA: formatting specification; a reference implementation?

ERO: meta-topic: what is the quality of the spec text required?











### Topic: Info Share



### Topic: Action Item Review

APP to check on license for software, test suite
ALL: read function registry PR
APP: review PRs for next time for commit 
STA: cleanup registry PR

APP: I am still working on the license. All of you had homework to read the function registry PR. I have reviewed the PRs. STA, what is the status of the registry PR?
STA: It is mostly done. I have comments from TIM to work through, and I have an idea of which comments that I will address in this PR versus in a followup PR.
### Topic: Quality of spec text

APP: When we have a PR, I would like to see text that is mature. Unless we deliberately leave work aside, we are not leaving work unaddressed. If we avoid that problem of omission, then we can and should work hard to commit text rather than iterating on it together. Nits should be handled by the author. Does that make sense? Does that address your concerns?

EAO: Partly yes. Maybe this is connected to what STA is talking about with the formatting part of the spec.
STA: Historically, we have used git and our `main` branch as a signification of consensus. This is a bit at odds with how git workflows operate. We have been prone to errors of leaving things out because of lack of agreement. It results in abstract text as a result. We need to agree about what it means to merge a PR, and that we can update things in the future.

APP: We have talked about that in the past. Things that get committed will be changed later. We don’t want to keep things in PRs in perpetuity, and we don’t have to because we can change things. We have done that in ABNF, etc. We don’t want to end up with docs in branches, etc.

I appreciate that EAO is doing work to improve things, but I want to make sure that we arrive at our destination.

ECH: This… if there is a lot of feedback on PRs, it’s the same sort of culture where we address everything until it’s ready to go. We comment on everything big-and-small to ensure that “landed” will be perfect because it may be “forever” before it can get fixed. This process has never changed. It always seems to take a way long time to get through a PR because of responding to changes, but in fact it’s just normal. I try to make sense of it by likening it to the time required to write tests for code that I’m writing. It’s just a part of the process.

EAO: Should we have guidelines for how long something can wait for PR reviews?

APP: As an author, you should expect that people can respond to your PR, but if there is an outstanding issue, then it is a technical issue, and it can and should be brought up in a meeting. We meet twice a month, so that builds in some frequency. I will be more aggressive in pushing PRs through. Silence is acceptance.

MIH: What I wanted to say is the opposite of that. Internally, for our code, if a reviewer leaves a comment, and the author does not address that for a while, then the status remains the same until the author addresses the feedback.

STA: I think we should use our judgment on how to proceed based on the PR.

APP: I think when we look at PRs together, it will help this conversation. We should not be merging based on silence, but instead based on consensus. If we have a technical issue, we should address it. If there is a technical issue, then also file an issue.

EAO: Can we make active PR review a part of our regular meetings?

APP: Yes, I will do that going forward.


### Topic: Active PR review
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.


| PR   | Description | Recommendation |
|------|-------------|----------------|
| #197 | Consensus 7 | Discuss (see below) |
| #278 | Add examples in other resource languages | Abandon |
| #315 | Bidi support | Discuss (see below) |
| #318 | Format to Parts | Reject (see below) |
| #357 | Unknown Markup error | Reject (obsolete) |
| #364 | Unquoted plain expression arguments | Merge with edits |
| #368 | Draft of registry | Discuss |
| #372 | Column-first | Merge |
| #381 | Variable overrides | Merge with edits |
| #382 | Literal Resolution | Discuss |



PR #197 is about an old WG consensus. Let's double-check that consensus quickly and merge in the call.
PR #315 about bidi needs another round of edits and should be discussed in a future call.
PR #318 about formatToParts is not written in a way that fits into the spec. A version that is "spec ready" should be produced instead.
The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.


#### #197 Consensus 7

APP: This is from years ago. Should we merge this in, or should we review it?

RCA: The comment that I added on the PR as a review required block was based on meeting feedback.

APP: If I merge it right now, are there any objections? And you can file an issue afterwards if you want to make changes. 

STA: Some of this wording is obsolete. But maybe we can make changes in a followup.

TIM: Was there anything specifically that seems obsolete?

STA: Message references seem obsolete. Maybe that is a detail.

APP: Since there are no objections, I will merge it.

#### #278 Add examples in other resource languages

APP: This was filed by a former colleague who has not responded. I don’t think we need this currently in our spec. There are no objections to closing this.

#### #315 Bidi support

APP: I propose that we defer this until we get to the point where we handle it. I can meet with EAO and anyone else interested at that point.


#### #318 Format to Parts

APP: I think this should be turned into a proposal, either as a doc or a PR.

MIH: That sounds good.


#### #357 Unknown Markup error

APP: This is about markup. This is now obsolete, so I will close it.


#### #364 Unquoted plain expression arguments

APP: What is the status of this, EAO?

EAO: I don’t know what else needs to be done to get approval to land. I don’t know whether something should have access to an input value, whether it’s quoted or not.

APP: When you parse a message, things should end up in a knowable slot. We shouldn’t have the situation where the input value could be in one of 3 possible categories. It shouldn’t matter whether it was an `nmtoken` or if it was quoted or not. It should end up as a value.

EAO: In the example of an option for, say, minimum fraction digits, the value should be an integer. But we provide the information as a string that is the substring within a pattern string. Should the type information be passed to the formatting function because we could also have variable references passed as the option value.

STA: I think this concern is valid but is outside the scope of the PR. I think this is good in its consistency, but I think this is going in the wrong direction. It still seems confusing.

EAO: I would be happy to drop `nmtoken`. And then say that option values be precluded from starting with a colon or dash. It might seem an odd restriction, but makes things more consistent.

MIH: Trying to think of this as a user of this feature, it might seem okay to have plain value options, so long as there are restrictions. I just don’t know what those restrictions are, though.

APP: As a chair, my executive observation is that we’re still discussing this, so it’s not ready to merge. I also share STA’s concerns about it being confusing, for example negative numbers. I think it makes sense to get to unquoted values. I agree with EAO that ultimately, these values come in as string but are handled on a different level, which is that they’re handled by the function.

STA: We also have specs from LDML for how to represent these values, so trying to get these unquoted values everywhere seems like a non-goal.

MIH: What were you referring to as a positional argument?

EAO: In the example `...{a :html src=....}...`, the `a` is a position argument to the `:html` function.

What else do we need to do? If we get rid of `nmtoken`, then we can no longer have an expression like `{$foo :func opt=-2}`

APP: I am suggesting that we fix the unquoted token so that it can take the place of `nmtoken` so that we can get rid of `nmtoken`.

TIM: In our discussion, we’re talking about quoted and unquoted literals. But currently, literals implied being quoted, and `nmtoken` implies unquoted.

STA: The XML definition of `nmtoken` allows for starting characters that conflict with our spec. And still, if there is any ambiguity in the resulting “unquoted literal” construct, a user can always quote the value.

APP: The direction we want to go, as has been said, is that everything provided that isn’t annotated as being some other type is a value, and some values are allowed to be unquoted.


#### #372 Column-first

APP: I think the discussion here has become quiet. Thanks EAO for doing the work on this. I think we can merge this, and I hear no objections.


#### #381 Variable overrides

APP: I haven’t heard responses, so I want to leave time for feedback. The example I was giving was that you can refer to the same thing on the left and right hand sides, which is confusing: `let $foo = {$foo} something`. You probably want instead to decorate that 

TIM: Can we not merge this PR until I have time to review. Name shadowing is a tricky concept.

MIH: We have talked about this before and that name shadowing is tricky and unnecessary. There is no point in allowing name shadowing. It’s easy enough to define a differently named variable.

EAO: Let’s continue this in the PR.

#### #382 Literal Resolution

APP: We need more reviewers for this PR.





### Topic: Formatting spec

STA: Could I create a presentation in 2 weeks to outline my ideas?

APP: There’s a difference between coming up theory and writing code based on it, which could cause code to be rewritten, versus starting with text based on experience and working on that as a starting point.

EAO: I can create a draft of the entire formatting spec, even though I haven’t thought about this. That would create a full draft of something so that we can talk about the entire set of issues together. This could help speed up our rate of landing, since our current rate is too slow to have something landed in this calendar year.

MIH: Sometimes, reviewing PRs is difficult because it is hard to argue with text that was already written with assumptions baked in. Those disagreements could have been properly discussed in issues before the PR was drafted.

UJJ: I understand the appeal of discussing things within self-contained issues, but in general, it’s easier to iterate around some text.

APP: Any objections to EAO drafting a spec for formatting? None heard. What is a timeline for this? A few weeks, maybe?

Another question that is interesting to consider is whether different implementations in different languages of the overall spec be allowed to have different output for the same input, or whether they can specify their inputs differently or not. Those questions are interesting, and would have impact the spec for formatting, too.

EAO: Are you closing #318 and #357?

APP: Yes.


### Topic: Function Registry (continued)
Continued discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/368 


### Topic: AOB?

For next time #375
