27 November 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)

Scribe: ECH

## Topic: Agenda Review

APP: Added topic of code mode introducer. Issue #477 might be ready to merge. Spannables and Format to Parts are on the agenda to discuss.

## Topic: Info Share

## Topic: Action Item Review

## Implementation of code mode introducer

- Confirm that we don't want to require any extra whitespace. (thread)
- Do we allow \. generally in text, or only in very specific places, or not at all? (thread)
- Should we include a text rule, even if text will mean something different? (thread)
- Is it enough to reserve statements that end with an expression? (thread)

APP: The theory of Option D is that a sigil followed by an identifier introduces code mode. In the course of implementation of the syntax, the discussion arose of whether or not we should reserve the sigil (dot `.`) so that we do not have to reserve keywords in the future. But doing so would bring up other issues.

MIH: I don’t remember if we have any decision on putting sigils on keywords.

APP: We made that decision last week based on the vote. Let’s go through the issues. The first is confirming we don’t want to require any extra whitespace.

EAO: If we use dot as the prefix of the keyword, it’s possible in a complex message to have a curly brace followed by a keyword like `}.when`. Everyone except one person said that it was not necessary to

APP: I think requiring a space there is a tripping hazard. You’re right that it’s unambiguous to a parser. It can help readability to have it, but not requiring it keeps out of the whitespace normalization business.

EAO: Let’s talk about escaping the dot `.` prefix used for keywords.

APP: One option is to only require an escaped dot `\.` to begin a simple message that starts a simple message with a dot followed by a keyword. One option is to not allow any simple message to start with a dot. Another is to always escape the dot anywhere in the pattern.

MIH: Can we have a separate vote about using dot for the prefix?

APP: We had a discussion already. Dots are used a lot in text, but I am also concerned about the escaping problem. We’re familiar from the apostrophe from current MF1 syntax. We can choose another sigil and that would reduce the need to escape.

EAO: My preference is to allow the escaped dot `\.` pretty much anywhere. It would allow affordances for users. My other proposal to make it narrower by saying an initial dot needs to be escaped 

ECH: I don’t like the idea of introducing another character that needs to be escaped everywhere. I was okay with option D from the previous vote. I thought that you could sidestep this problem for simple messages if the simple message started with .local or whatever. Feels like scope creep. I would reconsider my vote for option D. Feel strongly that how we consider the design for text-mode first, benefits are not outwightin the cost.

STA: I was going to say something to the same effect. Through the design of the issue that was voted on, and even with the sigil introducer, we have 8 of us discussing the implementation and we are coming up with multiple ideas already amongst ourselves.

APP: That is fair, that this is a question of our overall design. The question of whether the sigil should be something else is a matter of implementation decisions. I agree that using the dot as a sigil is more prevalent in text than is desirable.

EAO: Would people be interested in the idea of escaping initial dots only when it is followed by 4 letters?

MIH: -1

RGN: -1

STA: That sounds like it’s solving problems that we just introduced. I would like to see if we can design things to avoid the problems in the first place. So I am suggesting that we go back to the drawing board if that is the case.

EAO: Maybe the issue is that we are hitting the limits of ABNF. So we can give up on 

APP: The ABNF would define how you parse a message. A message that starts with `.XXXX` where the `XXXX` matches an existing keyword would result in an error. Or we can define that there will be an expression that closes the curly brace, to allow recovery of the rest of the message. We could have a list of reserved words that cannot be used, but that puts handcuffs on us.

MIH: The idea of requiring an escape of a character based on whether 4 alphanumerics follow it seems arbitrary and highly unusual.

STA: Parsers don’t work exclusively on the ABNF only. We don’t need to describe all errors exclusively in the ABNF. We can allow that errors to exist in the parsed ABNF

APP: One thing in our stability policy is that if we introduce a new sigil or new keyword, that it won’t result in a parse error. It suggests that we cannot have new keywords in MF2, but it could be supported in MF3. And if you really need to start a message with a dot keyword

ECH: Raised hand to say the same thing. If you need to start with .input, then quote the pattern. Don’t see the need.

RGN: I think it’s confusing behavior to have a valid pattern that is starting with `.foo`, but we have to quote it if it starts with `.match`. I would prefer that all messages starting with `.` be required to be quoted.

APP: We could write a rule in the ABNF that implements that.

RGN: Regardless of whether we write a production for this or not, we can say that a message cannot start with dot. If it does start with a dot, then there should be a keyword following it, or it becomes a parser error.

ECH: thought the idea of allowing an escaped dot anywhere was scope creep. If that’s necessary, that’s a bigger design issue. That’s what I’m pushing against. Discussion here is more contained with that. We are only talking about requiring a message to be quoted if it wants to start with dot `.`.

RGN: It’s less about the expectation that future keywords will be introduced, which we are not expecting, but more about having more consistent error states at the parser level.

EAO: One of the main benefits of having reserved statements and reserved annotations is that it will take time for tooling to support this, and they can adapt over time.

STA: If I misspell `.match` as `.mach`, how do reserved keywords help me detect that problem?

APP: If you misspell, you get an error saying that “message starts with a dot”. If you have reserved keywords, then your error message might include the misspelled keyword. The question I want to put forth is do we reserve a namespace for keywords, or do we _____?

STA: I thought the whole point of reserved keywords was to not get an error when I type `.mach` because we want MF 2.0 syntax to be handled by a MF 2.1 processor.

EAO: It at least gives the possibility for that to be handled.

APP: I think we have a consensus that dots can only appear on the front, they’re not escaped elsewhere. There is the question of whether we want to introduce keywords as a syntactical product. Do we think that simple messages that start with a dot should be quoted? Yes. Okay, so the only open question is whether the reserve space for future keywords. Is that correct?

EAO: I haven’t heard any arguments against.

STA: Two questions. About quoted patterns, I’m okay with that. To be clear, we have introduced an inconsistency in how we quote characters. We use `\{` for curlies.

APP: The distinction is between quoting characters with a pattern, and quoting patterns or not, and some simple messages need to be quoted.

STA: For reserved keywords, rather than reserve a list of potential keywords, add one more keyword that can then use `{` like before.

APP: That would look like `.future keyword {whatever}` or `.ex:future {whatever}`. That would be a very ugly syntax.

EAO: Does this mean that we can drop the need to escape `{` and `}` inside simple messages?

RGN: I would be against that. Having simple messages should have syntax that is minimally divergent should be our goal.

APP: Should we make an attempt to implement reserved keywords?

EAO: I think the current syntax is sufficient. It means that a parser implementation could be made entirely from the ABNF, but a human could apply the extra changes from an ABNF-based implementation to fit that.

STA: I have an objection to leave the restriction of keywords in the ABNF. I don’t mind if we refactor the ABNF and make changes. But it would be easier to just describe which keywords exist in our spec’s `syntax.md` doc, and take out future reserved statements from the ABNF.

MIH: +1

STA: To clarify, I am talking about removing the production for future reserved statements.

RGN: I have an opposition to that. I would like to have the formal grammar be defined clearly. Putting that information in spec text is less clear than putting it in the formal grammar.

APP: I agree. I think it’s weird to have secret keywords that are reserved as specified in text. It would be better to specify those things in the grammar, and have tokenizers built from that automatically detect problems.

EAO: Do we keep what we have, but add a note saying that our grammar is not valid grammar?

APP: That’s a note in `syntax.md`, and if that is what you are referring to, then I support that.

STA: I don’t understand. Are you saying that our ABNF is not valid ABNF?

APP: There is no way to say that a set of sequences cannot appear in a rule.

RGN: It’s not invalid to have a grammar that produces ambiguous parses. And that’s fine. The grammar is a recognizer that checks whether an input can be recognized as being valid. How we make sense of that correctly still needs to be defined, and implementations need to handle that, too.

EAO: I am fine with that. Is everyone else fine?

STA: Yes

APP: Yes

MIH: I’m not, but I can live with that.

APP: If we represent “a non-dot character” as a rule, then the cost is that we have to parse that as a separate entity, when what you want is parsing `.input` as one entity.

RGN: This comment https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/529#discussion_r1401328223 shows that it is possible to define the grammar differently 

MIH: I think the fact that we are having these problems points to the decision needing to be revisited

APP: I would like to have a text production.

What I want is `text` is the rule to describe the stuff in the patterns between placeholders.

EAO: I am going to apply the changes to the PR. I would like to close that PR and reopen a new PR that is the squashed version, and then make further changes.

STA: Can we not do that? It creates PR proliferation, and it makes it harder to track discussions?

APP: There is a lot of conversation already, and it is hard to follow. Having a PR starting from a squashed version would clean up the old conversation.

STA: I would like the open comments to be resolved in the existing PR, and add whatever we can into the existing PR, before spawning a new PR.



## Implementation of namespacing

APP: I don’t see much activity? Do people want more time to review?

EAO: The change to unquote applies. Do we discuss that separately?

APP: RGN, you called out that one of the unquoted values that would become invalid is an ISO-8601 time that contains a colon.

STA: We should not use the same production for `name`s and `nmtoken`.

APP: It would make it hard to parse things because an unquoted literal that contains a colon looks like a namespaced function.

EAO: Although a function must also start with a colon.

RGN: We know that won’t persist. The literal `-4` should be a number. There should be a separate production.

APP: This might conflict with our other PRs. We have a PR to discuss open/close syntax where +/- are options for sigils.

RGN: We can make the syntax change that is a strict superset of `name` that is `name` plus some other production for unquoted literals, but we should not mix the two. I would strongly object if we parsed `-4` as `name`, which would mean it is valid as a function name.

APP: We can create a separate production for unquoted literals.

STA: I want to point out that currently, unquoted literals cannot currently be a superset of `name` as it stands.

RGN: Are unquoted literals allowed to start with a colon?

APP: No. We use `xmlnames` to allow colons inside the identifier, which distinguishes it from `names`

RGN: That would wrap it up. And to support unsigned numbers like `1`, the `name` rule already prevents the identifier from starting with a number, so there is no ambiguity there, either, so that sounds good.

APP: Should we merge the PR?

RGN: Either sounds fine. The change sounds simple enough.

APP: I will make the change, I will wait on 2 reviews (one being RGN), and then I will merge.

## Quoting design

Let’s discuss #477

APP: Can we merge this? Anyone opposed? No, I hear no objection. Second question about whether there is appetite to changing the quoting characters.

EAO: I feel strongly and would like to bring that up. In addition to double curly braces and vertical pipes, I think we should also include single and double quotes.

APP: STA is correct that the PR represents our current consensus. You would need a PR to make the change that you’re proposing. Let’s merge this with status “Proposed”, and we can make time to later discuss what you’re talking about. Anyone opposed? No. I will merge #477 now.

## Open/close/spannables: where are we?

Let’s discuss the design document and progress we’ve made here.

EAO: I have a PR representing our preliminary consensus of our “hash and slash” approach. SInce I finished creating it today, let’s review it next week.

APP: Okay, let’s review #535.

STA: One of our homework items was to review the open close design doc. If anyone did that for today, I would be interested to hear their thoughts.

APP: Let’s give time for people to review #535 before deciding. We had a discussion about this last week.

STA: My understanding was that we did not reach a consensus last week, and that although there were no objections, we wanted to continue the discussion today, which we did not have time to do. This PR unfortunately jumped the gun by implementing the proposal with a status of Accepted. I would like to have that discussion.

APP: Next week, let’s talk briefly about implementing the ABNF. Then talk about open close. Then have a short conversation about spannables, and then talk about quoting.

EAO: The PR was a result of our discussion because it was the only option that didn’t receive strong opposition, and that option was proposed by you yourself, STA.

STA: This might be a general comment about how we decide things, but we end up options that are the 3rd choice, and not considering other options. I know we’re a standards body and need to make a decision, but I think we are not properly considering other design options.

APP: Okay. Let’s read up on the options and the comments. We’ll have a discussion about the design document on next week’s call.

STA: Although it is true that the hash-and-slash option was the only one not strongly opposed, so maybe the document in the PR, without declaring “Status: Accepted”, is a good starting point for people to start reading. I would be okay to merge as “Status: Proposed” and have that baseline of discussion.

APP: Let’s do that, and we will discuss next week.

## Format to Parts (#463)

Discuss the approach.

APP: MIH, I appreciate your reviews so far. Can you either work with EAO on this, or else work on a separate proposal? I don’t see how we are going to arrive at a consensus in the way that we are going.

MIH: I am not sure.

EAO: The current format to parts proposal is presented as optional.

MIH: It leaves room for some people to falsely claim that an implementation not supporting format to parts is not compliant.

APP: I think this could be solved by adding normative text that makes it clear what is compliant.


## Topic: AOB?


https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/513

