# 9 October 2023 MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

Scribe: MRR

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GaFadYbRpNVama4zZAjC79953JeQX50lhsCaFz--Fl4/edit

## Topic: Agenda Review

EAO: Would prefer to do smaller PRs (e.g. input + local)

## Topic: Info Share


## Topic: Action Item Review

MRR: Design proposal for tests
Will have proposal before next monday
Met with Stas last week to discuss test format and types

APP: Schedule and location of next F2F
Maybe TC39, maybe Bloomberg

## Topic: Whitespace

APP - Anything else we wish to consider other than the 7 options in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/487/files
 [No response]

APP - Default proposed is a combination of options 1 and 2. The mechanism for escaping literals will always be valid in our syntax because quoting a literal is valid. We don’t have to restrict ourselves to that though. Does anyone have a strong opinion other than that?

MIH - Yes, 3 or 4 [in chat]

ECH - 3 [in chat]

ZBI - Do we still wrap the whole message in {}

APP - No

APP - We will discuss switching between code and text mode.

EAO - Leading spaces are trimmed unless they’re explicitly escaped. I think there is decent resource level. Doesn’t impose requirement on. Level of indentation is completely eaten. It has to be a non-zero amount of indentation. If you want whitespace you have to explicitly escape each time.

RGN - What’s our definition of ‘whitespace’

APP - [References exploration/0487-whitespace.md]

EAO - We should add carriage return to that list.

APP - We have votes for having the pattern include whitespace.

EAO - Adding characters would add a significant cost to legibility (e.g. overloading curly brace with 2nd or 3rd meaning.)

MIH - I don’t see the escaping as decent. If I remove newlines, it means a “#when” could be part of the message and I have to escape that.

APP - Let’s discuss the syntax problem separately.

MIH - One use case for developers: In non-HTML UI (traditional software - windows/mac/liux/android). You have widgets- plain text, rich text (which are expensive). In plain text, it’s common to fake formatting - you indent, “ * “. It’s fake rich text format.

MIH - Eemeli sent out a message about localizable spaces surrounding a message. That’s not relevant because I always want that there.

EAO - It’s relevant - surrounding spaces are there for 2 general purpose reasons - markup (e.g. two newlines, bullet indicator with space at start, string concatenation reasons). These really ought to be outside the message. We ought to have a way of representing them in a message, which is established by options 1 & 2. Not all spaces are just markup - some are spaces that are used to separate sentences. Some markup space is localizable - You might want to center text visually, per locale. I’d prefer that we find a way to communicate to localizers which sort of space they are looking at - space not to touch (markup) or the sort that they should be localizing (e.g. a space after a period when writing Japanese). That’s something that’s not currently supported and we can provide a solution that’s better than the state-of-the-art. The great majority of spaces are just markup - my preference is to not make it easy to presume that everything is just markup and communicate to developers through the syntax what sort of a space they end up looking at so that the tools can treat it accordingly for better localization.

APP - I’m sympathetic to what MIH expressed because I am in that world. Devs are not good judges of whether the spaces are required. I agree with your thinking but we need to make it clear how things should work. Can we concentrate on how we narrow down the whitespace management strategy. Noone has expressed interest in escaping whitespace so it would be good if we can take that off the table. Do we want to permit quoting the pattern? Permitting this would create localizable whitepace without using placeholders. If we want to do that, it will become part of our syntax discussions. If we want to prohibit this, I’d be sympathetic because it would reduce the number of ways we’re using curly brackets.

MIH - If I really want space-bullet-space, I can wrap that. To clarify my vote for 3+4: I would like to see the whole string wrapped. In the complex code messages in the document[...]
I would vote for WYSIWYG. It’s the best rule for translators. No escaping anything.

APP - #7?

MIH - Yes and no - When you show it to translators yes, but it depends how you get to the string.

ECH - #3 -Theres a question of ‘how do we make he whitespace before/after localizable?’. In opt 3 you have flexibility that you don’t see in 1 or 2. Plus it’s more flexible.

APP - Technically 2 is localizable but it’s not quoted,

ECH - Therefore it’s confusing. I think the simplicity of 3 plus the flexibility is important.

STA - I like what APP observed: Whether we like it or not 1 and 2 are already possible. We can tap into the gut feeling and embrace, discourage it. A lot of toolchains will treat the placeholders as special. I’m concerned about the complexity that this brings into the parser. We have an opportunity to fix the duality of curly braces. There is confusion stemming from that but we got used to that. Something more like option 4. I understand it’s costly to use {{}} but it’s an opportunity.

APP - Options 1 and 2 will always be possible but do we provide additional affordance?

STA - 1 and 2 = Do nothing?

APP - Things are good until we line-break and wrap down:
```
{input $foo}\nHello world
```

APP - Shall we vote?

EAO - 1. Only 1+2 2. Also allow \ escaping spaces 3. All whitespace matters 4. Delimit the pattern

MIH - 1) #3 or #4  2) #5, #6, #7  3) Pretty much against #1 or #2, because that means unlocalizable spaces.

ECH -      3 = 4 >> 5 = 6 = 7

MIH -      Plain text in placeholder without function is non-localizable. Messing with that is opening another can of worms :-)

ZIB - 2 > 4 > 6 > 5 > 3 > 7. 1 doesn’t seem to be a viable option per what MIH said.

RGN - 3 = 4 >> 5 = 6 = 7

STA - 7 > 5 = 6 > 1 = 2 > 4 > 3

STA - Have we discussed an inverse of 6? - no trimming but you can use the backslash to mean ignore.

ZBI - If we stay with 1 or 2 and add 3 or 4 later, what is the opportunity cost?

APP - 3 or 4 are saying our syntax will not normally include floating around patterns, therefore quoting is necessary to avoid trimming.

ZBI - Could we reserve syntactic space?

APP - That would instantly implement #3 and #4.

EAO - We would have to lose unquoted placeholders in literals.

MIH - When you see {       something}, you see a placeholder, which is usually non-localizable. The escape is not as clean as we claim - it would be really confusing.

ZBI:
1 - 2 legal already
3 - 4, we cant add in 2.1
5 - 6 could be added in 2.1 

EAO - Would anyone oppose a backslash escape of the 4 characters and trim?

APP - This would make me nervous, getting into double or triple escaping when our syntax goes into a host syntax.

EAO - We are allowing option 2 already. That’s one way of how to express localizable leading or trailing space.

MIH - Would like to remind people: Any kind of judgments is what gave us the apostrophe in MF1. That’s why I’d argue for WYSIWYG.

APP - If we allow option 4 where there is a clear way to quoting a pattern in start-in-text-mode syntax, would that be an acceptable compromise?

EAO - I would be opposed. About a week ago, I spoke with APP about my position on this. What it would take for me to change my mind on this. I don’t expect us to go through that now but my position against 3 and 4 is quite strong.

EAO - I’d imagine a marker at the beginning and end

APP - Shorthand of 2?

EAO - Yes, but a different syntax communicating exactly this, not a hack.

STA - Imagine there would be a special character inside the [*], this is what some templating languages do. I want to make a case for 7, then 4, which is not what I wrote in the stack rank.

STA - A lot of strings will be spreadsheets. A lot will be single line. However, if you need multi-line, I think a complex syntax like 4 might be ok - we could consider extra steps - e.g. not just eating extra leading/trailing, but also indentation.

APP - An enclosing resource formatter could choose to do this trimming. It would be the problem of the resource formatter.

STA - Assuming you line up all lines to the same column.

ZBI - Based on ABNF, option 4 is perfectly forward compatible.

APP - Don’t look at the ABNF

ZBI - We don’t use {{}} for anything currently. We could give it meaning in 2.1. I think opt 3 and 4 are very different.

ZBI - The hybrid option of 2, with pip:, - knowing history, there is going to be a 2-year gap between MF2 and an exciting framework comes out that uses pipes for everything. I’d be worried about using pipes and trying to encode JSX equivalents. I’m starting to lean to using something elaborate.

EAO - [Mark requested in notes] We need to add the opening curly brace to the reserved set of sigils to use it later.

EAO - I’d be fine with syntax attached to the end for the whitespace being protected, rather than syntax across the whole pattern to mark whitespace at one end of it.

APP - Is that something we can agree on? That’s effectively 2 or shorthand of 2.

APP - You could say that 6 is a shorthand of 2 maybe.

ECH - It seems strange to put something just at the end. I’m not keen.

STA - I don’t mind putting things on both sides. My mental model is either single- or multi-line and one or the other gets special treatment. E.g. triple quotes, EOF markers. I would like to ask if we’re solving the right problem. I know we like writing multi-line strings. Maybe 4 is the right compromise.

APP - For option 4?

For: MIH, ECH, RG, MRR, (STA, but considering combination with 2)
Against - EAO
Defer - ZBI


ZBI - Can we add 4 in 2.1?

EAO - Yes - if braces within the reserved space, or we add a special reserve for {{}}

EAO -I think 4 is ok as people want it, but not 3.

STA - All unquoted whitespace is trimmed?

APP - Yes

STA - The idea to advocate for 7 is not well fleshed out.

APP - My objection to 7 is spacing errors where people type space after the ‘when’ clause. The urge to put a space there will come and bite lots of people. Auto-trimming feels better (something like 4), but I agree with EAO that these cases are rare so making people work harder to get them was a good compromise. Maybe 1 and 2 are too much work.

EAO - {{}} are a pattern delimiter, not a placeholder delimiter

APP -Yes

EAO - Good. You can count the number of curlys to work out if you’re in text or not, like MF1.

STA - I acknowledge APP’s concerns with 7 - I’ll open an issue about it.

APP - We don’t have indentation because we’re a single-line syntax.

STA - People will work out multi-line, and they’ll want indentation.

APP - There’s no indentation in the syntax effectively.

EAO - STA, would you be ok going with {{}} and that the design doc that you raise is not considered blocking?

APP - Is 4 consensus?

STA - Is it OK if I come back to you on this?

APP - If we _always_ trim, everything in a simple message. Do you only quote the pattern when you’re in a variant?

MIH - What’s inside the {{}} is WYSIWYG, for simple messages, it’s again WYSIWYG. It’s very consistent.

EAO - What happens with declarations? They ought to be on a separate line. My pref is to trim always unless in {{}}, then we solve all the problems.

APP - Can we adopt that as a consensus?

ZBI - I still think we should not introduce 4 yet, just make space for it to be added later.

STA - I’ll think more about 7 and auto-trimming but OK to go forward with 4 as consensus.





## Topic: Syntax

APP - Is there a leader for syntax approach?

EAO - Start in text, something like 2 but allowing ‘when’ with autotrimming around it.

APP - Nearly all do that.

STA - Visually (mostly) 3. Specifically I like the fact that we’re not using braces. It means that we’d need to escape #. It makes it easier to identify on one line.

APP - I will set up some stack ranking so we can have discussion around this in the coming week.

EAO - Start in text and everything in {} to be text. Statements (input/local/match) - I quite like using a # for this e.g. {#statement}. It would visually separate. No text absolutely needs to be delimited.

APP - I will make that an option.

APP - I’ll try to conduct a semi-survey on syntax.

EAO - Can we land the “local/input” design doc?

STA - Is it finished? [...] I missed the update.

APP - Shall I merge

STA - Yes.

EAO - I’ll mark the draft PR on that as ready for review.

APP - We can merge the whitespace design doc next week.
