### Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TJC)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
Romulo Cintra - Igalia (RCA)
Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

### Previous meeting (2023-02-13) Attendees
Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
Matt O’Conor - Bloomberg (MOC)
Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)


### Scribe

* MIH 

### Notes doc location

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WN2xLV9hp0n_49ApAJgjGpe9B_UiV-Mvo6QBk4TtGsI/edit#

#### Agenda

Topic: Agenda Review
Topic: Info Share
Topic: Action Item Review
Topic: Function Registry (continued)
Requested by: STA
Discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.

Über-topic: ABNF
We need to decide if the ABNF changes are ready to commit. As suspected, writing the ABNF exposed a host of other issues for discussion. But let's start with deciding to commit this ABNF (or request more edits) and then proceed to discuss issues that might modify it.
#347
Topic: First-match vs. best-match
Requested by: APP
#351
Topic: whitespace in the EBNF
Requested by: APP, STA
This topic appears to be done, but let's make sure we agree on the whitespace handling.
#340
Topic: Delimiter for literals
Requested by: STA
#263
@stasm reopened this as part of our ABNF work. We need to close on whether to keep ( and ) for literals or switch to |
Topic: Markup
Requested by: APP, MIH
#356
@mihnita has called out that our decisions about markup might be premature. Meanwhile, based solely on consistency and the ABNF work, @aphillips has a PR adding a markup error. Let's discuss markup.
@mihnita notes:
Markup open issues:
#241
#262
#238
And to show that it was not agreed on, see PR #283 in Jun 21, 2022:
I will approve it to move things forward and not have these many open PRs. It does not mean I agree with this syntax, so it should not be hold against me 1 month from now ("but you approved X") There are still at least 2 open issues arguing about how to best handle "markup elements"

---

#### Topic: ABNF Pull requests

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/347

“Raw” view: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/84bbfa1dd751eb1915514cf7eb37e3834748bbf8/spec/message.abnf 

STA: also discuss issues tagged blocker-candidate & resolve-candidate

STA: ABNF is based on the PR #344 dealing with whitespaces, which means it is blocked
Also uneasy about using a tool (REx) that is not available as source, only as a web service (https://www.bottlecaps.de/rex/)

APP: Can we resolve the ABNF issue first?  A lot of interesting points arose in that discussion. I see agreement from the group.

APP: Let’s talk about whitespace.

EAO: I think we should require whitespace in places where it is allowed. I think it will make things more legible. This requirement might be novel for things like this. What do people think about the impact on tooling like minifiers.

STA: the current syntax uses some tool specific markers, but the tool allowed for non-standard syntax that allowed us to unwittingly overlook the issue of whitespace altogether.

SCL: I’m in favor of making it optional. It’s an unnecessary opinion. I don’t think minification is a big part of l10n work or a compelling reason.

STA: The minified messages are legible even without whitespace. Two opinions in the same time: formatting it when writing, but probably the grammar is not the right level to enforce this.

EAO: Have you figured out how to make the grammar LL(1), or does it remain LL(2), currently?

STA: I think we are currently LL(2). But to be fair, I am not very concerned whether it is LL(2) or LL(1).

MIH: I think STA clarified well the point that there are 2 considerations, one is how you write it by hand, and the other is how to parse. The decision about the `*` keyword for the catch all case might supersede the other decisions because having several stars together like `****` seems unreadable. I wonder if having an LL(2) grammar tells us something about how simple the grammar is or isn’t.

APP: If we want future extensions we should reserve them in the v1 released grammar, and therefore decide today. Regarding whitespace, I’m okay with people with people writing without whitespace because it still seems legible. I’m still open to requiring at least one whitespace.

STA: The question about `****` is whether we can consider `*` as a token.

MIH: I think we need to keep the * and (*) as different. One is keyword for default, the other is a literal.
STA: ok, agree

STA: Regarding relaxing the grammar, we can allow 1 whitespace like XML does, which I would be okay. But what would the group think about allowing `****`, and I realized that having grammar that is lenient is helpful, and tooling (ex: linters) can use our grammar to fix messages.

EAO: ok to require spaces around {} only. Can we require whitespace in the Variant production?

APP: There is already whitespace required between the `when` values in the Variant production.

STA: And there is an implicit whitespace requirement between `NMTOKEN`s because if you don’t put in a whitespace, then 

ECH: I agree with EAO in wanting to require whitespace, but I am feeling less strong now about requiring whitespaces except for the `when` values in the Variant production. It would look inconsistent and confusing to have whitespace between some values but not have them between a series of `*` like `****`.

Longer discussion around examples
```
match {$x}
when*{{a=(b)c=d}}

match {$x}
when * {{a=b c=d}}

match {$x}
when * {{a=bc=d}} => invalid
```

EAO: I don’t like the implicitly required whitespace for 2 reasons. If you had a `*false*` value for a boolean function return value then you could write `when *false` without it being confused for 2 different values `*` `false`. Having explicitly required whitespaces makes it easier to work with the data model and update the ABNF as issues come up.

MIH: I started this meeting thinking that I want whitespaces in a lot of places, but after hearing the arguments, I am fine having no whitespaces. I agree that I wouldn’t write it that way, but we shouldn’t conflate parsing with style.

APP: EAO you bring up a good point about the options list. Instead of using spaces as a delimiter, maybe we should use a comma. Separately, we should think hard about reserving characters for future use, not having them currently participate in the grammar but allowing us extension points in the future.

STA: Regarding to the AST transformation argument, there is some validity to it. But I don’t think the AST transform should serialize to the syntax we are discussing here. It should put spaces in as needed, and not try to adhere to the minified version. Regarding commas, you start running into the problem of whether trailing commas are okay. If we’re okay with whitespace around curly brace delimiters be optional, then we’re in agreement.

EAO: I’m okay with that, and moving to another topic.

APP: Can we talk about decisions about specific changes in the PR?

EAO: Let’s have the discussion about whether whitespaces are optional between function options separately, because I would be opposed to that being optional.

STA: Let’s move forward with the current the PR, and leave it as an issue to further relax space requirements.

APP: Let’s have discussions on specific changes to the ABNF via PRs and discuss them separately. So a separate PR for whitespace between keys, and a separate PR for whitespace between function options, if that is desired.

STA: Okay, I will merge the PR. And I will not file issues but instead only have PRs. Is that what you are suggesting?

APP: 

#### Topic: Delimiter for literals

STA: after using things for a while, I think that (...) seem to imply some kind of “optionality”
Suggesting vertical pipe ( | )

MIH: When we originally discussed round parentheses, the argument was that we need the pairing behavior of an open and close delimiter, and a vertical pipe (|) does not have that property. But other syntaxes use vertical pipes just fine.

EAO: If no one is defending using parentheses versus using a pipe, then we can go ahead with the PR to use the pipe as a delimiter.

EAO: One other point on this as it relates to whitespace is if we do use vertical pipes as delimiters for literal, then it strengthens the need to have whitespace, because if you have 2 literal values next to each other in a `when` clause, it would be hard to read: `when |foo||bar| …`.

ECH: +1 to EAO’s comment

STA: This 

EAO: Let’s agree to switch to vertical pipes, and then an action item for STA to file the PR.

APP: Before to leave the topic is whether we should reserve symbols for future productions. That is something to think about, and I can file an issue.

EAO: As an observation, I think we have effectively already done that. Whatever hasn’t been u

APP: Yes and no. Yes, we could insert new rules, but no, beca-cuse it would break previous parsers.

EAO: That is a good point.

ECH: I am +1 to APP’s proposal.


#### Topic: Issues tagged resolve-candidate

Try to close what is non-controversial

#### Topic: First-match vs. Best-match

APP: Just to introduce the topic for next time, look at issue #351 and the new pull request related to it. The current status is to take the first variant whose when condition matches. The proposal is to 

#### Topic: Markup

APP: Just to introduce the topic for the next time, we have called out that the ABNF has reserved syntax for markup. There are a bunch of questions that flow from that, like whether the syntax can be different, and whether they work as we intend them to. Another issue that I raised, and others chimed in on, is whether we can protect markup. Say, using XLIFF to protect markup. Issue #356 is the place to start.

MIH: My position is that markup is not required, and you can achieve all that you want with markup using placeholders. The other issue is a meta-level concern about whether we properly agreed 




