### 2023-01-23 Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
* Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TJC)
* Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
* Romulo Cintra - Igalia (RCA)
* Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
* Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)
* Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
* Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)

### Last Meeting Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP)
* Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
* Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
* Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)


### Action Items

* [APP] Update goals.md page per discussion, particularly non-goal 4 about implementations.
* [APP] Sync with @macchiati et al about specification format
* [All] Review PR #320 ***before*** Monday, 30 January. silence == merge

### Agenda

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/meetings/agenda.md 

* **Topic:** Agenda Review
* **Topic:** Info Share
* **Topic:** Action Item Review
* **Topic:** Admin

Requested by: chair
Changes to labels, agenda structure, note taking.
Scribe: will someone volunteer to be the official scribe or do we use a rotation?

* **Topic:** Schedule and Goals for 2023

Requested by: chair
#328

* **Topic:** Error Handling PR

Requested by: EAO
#320

* **Topic:** (Discussion) Consider adding an FAQ section to the README

Requested by: glen-84
#321

* **Topic:** (Discussion) Guidance needed for dealing with selector explosions

Requested by: STA
#323




## Admin


(discussion of agenda logistics)
STA and ECH are the scribes.
## Info Share
SCL: Introducing himself.


## Action item review
APP: Waiting for MIH to open a PR with his feedback on ….


## Topic: Schedule and Goals for 2023
APP: Filed [Proposal for setting goals for 2023 · Discussion #328 · unicode-org/message-format-wg](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/328) to discuss the work-back schedule for the WG's deliverables. Any thoughts today?

SCL: No idea if this is doable, but the industry is eager for this.

EAO: The spec, icu4j, icu4c are rather separate things. Are we discussing about releasing the spec in some form, effectively have it ready by July? Or is the scope more about the implementation which is currently in tech preview in ICU.

APP: First, produce a normative document (UTS or … ). Second, have implementations to demonstrate the functionality.


RCA: Are we having other non-ICU implementations as well?


APP: Yes, more is better. At least 2. They should be aligned with the spec.


STA: there is the question of doing the work and the time, but also the form it takes. Is this a separate UTS or something. Action from this meeting? Does choosing one of the formats affect the dates?


APP: Fair question. We can incorporate things by reference into UAX 35. That shouldn’t affect the schedule that much. There is still the question is about getting onto the Unicode 16 train.


EAO: 


APP: I have the release candidate of the spec scheduled for mid-August. Just a proposal, we can modify when we commit to doing them. If we decide to have a milestone for the version of the spec, then we can have a lot of discussions about the scope.


STA: We could review our originally documented deliverables for the group. [Link](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/guidelines/goals.md), in the section “Deliverables”.


EAO: I think all of them are fine, except we drop the XLIFF deliverable. We decided that in consultation with CLDR-TC.


STA: I don’t recall that.


ECH: I don’t recall that either.


MIH: I don’t recall that either.


APP: Will this working group do the implementation? I look at standards as not existing until you can point to one.


STA: With implementations, they are not authored by the working group, they are authored by people who are also in the working group, and those implementations don’t go through working group processes.


EAO: Impls are dependencies, not deliverables.


STA: Maybe the function registry should be a separate item in deliverables, since we added that as a requirement.


EAO: The same thing that applies to the impls applies to the XLIFF work because XLIFF is not a part of this group.


ECH: I don't recall saying that XLIFF is off the books. Also, the recommendations that we got from the CLDR TC should be documented in our [2022-04-04 meeting notes](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/meetings/2022/notes-2022-04-04.md). It doesn’t say no to XLIFF, it only says that the work should be done in parallel to the initial technical preview implementation in ICU4J.


MIH: If we were to leave XLIFF conversion work to someone else, it is unlikely to be done because it is such big work.


APP: Is it a lower priority to us than other deliverables?


MIH: Probably. We don’t have to always think about it, but It should be in the back of our minds as “can we map this feature to XLIFF?”.


## Topic: (Discussion) Consider adding an FAQ section to the README
Requested by: glen-84
#321
STA: The original point of the proposal is also valid. Useful to add because some decisions are controversial. It will be useful to hear the questions of “why?” from participants.


EAO: Some of these questions were discussed before and there were strong opinions and valid reasons for delimiting the text and code parts of the syntax. Now that we have a bit more experience with the syntax, I'm curious whether these opinions are still so strong. The sticky point is about why we delimit text and not code.


ECH: We had a lot of disagreements on nitty gritty details. Some of them were a matter of taste or opinions. But we also thought we needed more opinions from other people. Having a FAQ might give people the misleading impression that these decisions are more authoritative than they are. We need this feedback to help us get us more input on what works for people. Maybe we can use the Discussions feature of the repo to make it easier for people to weigh in on what they think.


SCL: The public preview can call out these discussions explicitly.


MIH: We discussed this a lot. It's not only about trimming spaces. It's mainly about which mode to start in. About consistency. About the minimal message of `{Hello, World!}`. I'd be careful about feedback with the sample size of 1. Other reasons: recognizability of MF2 as syntax; syntax error recovery.


APP: To the question of “should we write a FAQ?”, the answer is yes. To the question of syntax, we should consider how usable it is. I’m less concerned about mixing 5 types of formats together, but the point about starting in text mode is important. We did go down this path for certain reasons, we shouldn’t have to litigate those choices. The problem isn’t questions of taste, but the performance, and whether we can explain to audiences of developers.


STA: I don’t mean the FAQ to be an authoritative source of truth, but rather a history of discussions. As we involve more people, their new feedback will repeat some of the same arguments. It will be good to document these because some later comment might give us new insight.


ECH: Suggestion: use the QA feature of github to document the questions and the answers.


MIH: I still think trimming leading and trailing whitespace is a bad idea, but it doesn't require the curly braces. Instead, it can be treated as a concern of the container format / serialization.


APP: We probably want to have description in our spec text about why things are the way they are.


MIH: What about pointing to the FAQs from the Readme, since FAQs tend to grow?


STA: ECH suggested Q&A on Github but that ties us to Github. Sometimes, it’s easier to deal with text. Or maybe we can use Discussions to draft responses to SCL’s questions, and we can convert that into text in the repo later.


APP: STA you are correct that at some point, we want to control our responses to such questions.




## Topic: Error Handling PR
Requested by: EAO
#320
EAO: Went through the discussion in the PR and marked a number of threads as resolved. Please go over the current text and identify blockers to merging it.


APP: The text seems okay, but it is missing classes of errors and their different states. My tendency is to think in terms of normative text as being very clear. Unicode specs like UTS 35 can be verbose, and collation can give you a high level explanation with a lot of details without telling you how to implement them. I see W3C and IETF specs as generally easier to read through and understand, so I personally favor that.


MIH: I don't consider the PR as ready for submission. There are issues raised that don't have answers. (EAO: Example?) In one of the types of errors there's mention of including the id of the message. 


EAO: It was addressed. MIH: It wasn't. APP: Are you looking at the thread of the current text in the file? MIH: Thread.


STA: I would like us to resolve this discussion once and for all, regardless of the decision, so that we can make progress.


APP: I think it’s valuable to have hefty, gnarly discussions in threads so that we can properly discuss things before coming to a decision. EAO, to your point about the output, if we have descriptions of what the return values are per error type, then it will help us write tests accordingly.


APP: STA’s comment is valid: do we collect all of the errors, do we nest errors, or do we just throw the first one?


EAO: We want to go even further: we want to allow implementations to decide.


MIH: Agreed, it's implementation-specific. Whether to collect all errors should be up to the implementation.


EAO: The current PR text is rather strict about …


EAO: "an informative error or errors must be provided"


APP: It seems important that we have some descriptions of what output to expect for certain inputs, like if you have a placeholder named `$foo` but you have that represented in runtime data, then we should describe the way in which output will look.


STA: If you have a scenario where you have multiple errors, like selecting on a selector that isn’t present, and trying to include it in the message, you have different types of errors to use, but at least just specify the type of error and how it should the error response should report things as.


APP: If we want to make errors part of the compliance tests, then yes. But errors can also be internal to implementations.


EAO: The conformance suite could specify the expected formatting result and the list of expected errors and require at least one of these errors to be produced by implementations.


MIH: If we allow merging PRs that are not fully agreed on / finished, do we want to add some verbiage to the spec to mark it as draft?


APP: At a meta-level, if we commit text to the spec, but we still think that further work is needed, then we should file issues against them.

