[Automatic Full Transcription](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JHCA3QVkf3UATAph0PJpX2Rp6kaW8JYZonzaPK0gE88/edit?usp=sharing)


### August 16, meeting Attendees
- Romulo Cintra (RCA)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Erik Nordin - Mozilla (ETN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Matjaž Horvat - Mozilla (MAT)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- David Filip - Huawei, OASIS XLIFF TC (DAF)
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting 

September 20, 11am PST (6pm GMT) 

### Moderator : Romulo Cintra 
 
### Agenda 
 
More on function composition , Data Model — presentation by @stasm
#186 - @zbraniecki
#181 Cont. & Data & Execution Model Differences Overview

### The Third Data Model

STA: (presents slides ) [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pex8lEIQ0dFs72ATxva0IprIP6xLe14Sop2Oy4xPXFo/edit?usp=sharing)

(question on slide "Experiments" about LIST_FORMAT)

Mihai: The EM model doesn't do it this way. ListFormat is a function like all the others.

STA: Let's revisit this at the end of the presentation.

STA: (continues presenting slides)

EAO: I think STA is wrong about the dangers brought by composability. On the edges, it is important to be able to limit them or their visibility. But I don't think this is a limitation we need in the data model. And if we don't allow for function composability, we lose compatibility with Fluent, which would be unfortunate. The impact would be on a few custom functions. To be clear, I'd be happy to continue discussing the data model as this being the baseline. Having functions calls only apply on the top level would be something we could consider. Now, on message references. With a simple model, you could formulate glossaries… if this group ends up being of the opinion that the need for composability is questionable, we can move to this data model, and address composability as a separate question.

STA: I implemented this in our experimental branch. For the message reference stuff, I know we reached consensus, but I'd like to defer that for another meeting.

GWR: I appreciate that we can do static analysis. The more you can do before runtime, the better. The third data model that I see on the left is pretty close to what we're using. I have a question about numbers; you had NumberLiteral as a string?

STA: I did that because you can't distinguish between floats and integers in TypeScript.

GWR: I'm okay with the idea of a generic number type, but not a string.

STA: Thanks for raising this; we can discuss this further.

GWR: When it comes to this syntax, is this something developers see?  Or are we using XML, … ?

STA: This is only example syntax. I think the syntax should be orthogonal to what we talk about here. We just need a way to give a function name, array of args, and record of options.

Mihai: A couple of notes. The function composition in the EM model with the vertical pipe is not a first-class citizen. It starts with functions, and I went with that syntax because the discussion was that the EM model cannot do what the EZ model does.

…

EAO: Mihai, would you be okay if we started adopting the function structure that Stas is proposing as a baseline, and develop it from there, rather than taking the function structure from EM or EZ?

Mihai: Maybe, but I'm not prepared to say that yet. I need more time. I have some questions that I am sending to Stas.

ZB: One way to think about decisions is to think about one-way versus two-way decisions. I think this is a perfect two-way decision; if we adopt Stas's model, we can start iterating on it, and go back to something else if we find there is a need.

…

RCA: Should we adopt Stas's model as a baseline?

Luke, EAO, GWR, DLM, ETN: +1

Mihai: I won't vote, because what is shown on the screen (the slide "FuncCall interfaces") is not really the EM model.

ZB: I didn't vote because I feel that we should have more time to look at it. We should vote next month.

### Zibi's presentation from Issue #186











 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
