TCQ https://tcq.app/meeting/xYmh
Github: Meeting Agenda : 2021-02-15: #148

Attendees:
Please fill in a 3-letter acronym if this is your first meeting:
- Suggestion 1: First letter of given name, First letter of surname, Last letter of surname
- Suggestion 2: First initial, middle initial, last initial
- Suggestion 3: Custom

#### February 15, Meeting Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Mihai Nita (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- David Filip - Huawei, OASIS XLIFF TC (DAF)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

March 15, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/148)
Improving MFWG meeting notes
Progress on Data Model unification [#141](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/141)
Consensus on external selectors #137
 

### Moderator : Romulo
 
## Improving MFWG meeting notes
 
RCA: We did not have many notes from the last meeting. In the chair group meeting, we discussed ways to improve note taking. What do you all think of the options?
 
NIC: Does anyone have an objection to recording ourselves? If not, we can try doing that since we had a drop in note taking?
 
RCA: My first preference is for a library (software) for transcription.
 
MIH: If we keep a recording for transcription, it should be for a relatively limited time. That point is also in the chair group meeting notes.
 
STA: I think the recording serve different purposes. The transcription from a recording helps for notes, but the recording itself can help people catch up to 
 
USA: Notes work the same way, they help most when you want to catch up or search for something.
 
GWR: Transcription is really helpful to remind yourself of what you agreed on. Audio could be helpful, but I don't know about having video.
 
RCA: First question: should we record? Second question: do we use the transcription of the recording or do we take notes taken during the meeting.
 
MIH: Or option 3 is to record, and use the transcription of the recording to supplement the notes.
 
RCA: 
Option 1: Video / audio recording + manual note taking. 
Option 2: automated transcription + manual note taking. 
Option 3: manual note taking, recording video / audio + automated transcription
 
NIC: After you mentioned it, RCA, I turned on the automated transcription, and I too am impressed.
 
MIH: 2 or 3
EAO: fine with anything
NIC: 2 or 3
ZBI: no opinion
STA: 3
GWR: not opposed, slight pref for 2
USA: 2.
 
RCA: Option 2 seems like a winner.
 
USA: Allso, we can use the bot that we use during TC 39 meetings and use that, I can check with Kevin.
 
RCA: Let's check offline and try option 2 next meeting (manual note taking + automated transcription)
 
MIH: Can everyone see “Raise hand” in Meet? Maybe use that instead of TCQ?
 
ECH: TCQ gives us a queue plus inserting questions into it. Should we present the notes or TCQ during the meeting? (Agreed on notes.)
 
 
## Progress on Data Model unification #141
 
RCA: Let's talk about data model unification that MIH, ZBI, EAO, and ECH have been working on.
 
EAO: Still in progress.
 
ZBI: I can give a summary of where we are.  We started with 4 different models, and we looked at similarities and differences. We have different models and naming schemes. Based on the similarities, we wanted to reduce the number of models to consider from 4 to 2. We are starting to coalesce on naming schemes, too. We will meet again on Thursday and reduce from 2 to 1 and present at the next meeting.
 
Interesting for the group is that we discussed what types are possible. When I say "type", the obvious ones are string and number. The non-obvious ones are boolean, some rich structures (which we sometimes call Formattables), we have functions and are the types of inputs and outputs, and what kinds of types can developers pass?
 
Data model has consequences on fallback-ing (locale matching) and error scenarios (runtime checking) on invalid inputs.
 
EAO: If anyone wants to join us, please do. The meeting time is Thursday 7am Pacific Time.
 
ZBI: We are treating our work as an input to the conversations in this group, and not as any sort of decision.
 
RCA: There is a question on TCQ that I will raise. The first one, on the topic of locale matching (fallbacks) and error handling. Are you taking that into account?
 
ZBI: Yes, there might be implications of the data model on these points.
 
RCA: Can we send an email to the whole MFWG? Share to interested people who might to join.
 
ZBI: I think there will be a long conversation in this group. What this current huddle for data model among MIH, EAO, ZBI, and ECH is just reducing the points of contention.
 
MIH: Yes, the output of this unified data model is just a starting point for the discussion here in this group.
 
DAF: Please send me the invite.
 
STA: What are the cutoff criteria for calling this preliminary work done? The question of what data types there should be is something we could all discuss together?  What are you merging versus discussing new things?
 
ZBI: My expectation is that by the next meeting, we will present or share a doc or Github issue. We'll describe alternatives and pros and cons, sticking points, agreements, etc.
 
 
 
 
 
## Consensus on external selectors [#137](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/137)
 
RCA: In the last meeting, we agreed to decide on a summary of our consensus on our discussions about external selectors
 
STA: What I have in [issue 149](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/149) is an attempt to describe restricting message references to reduce complexity. Once you have message references, you can no longer prevent nested messages. Also, messages are now dependent on each other, so when the storage of messages migrates, all messages must migrate in lockstep.
 
I made up a word "Referenceable" to generically describe any entity that can reference another entity.

If we can break up the dependency graph to not be too many levels deep, we can reduce complexity.
 
What I am proposing is that messages either only reference things in the registry or things directly in the referenced ("child") message.
 
Message references often get used to refactor out common / shared content in messages, and that leads to bad times for localization, so we want to plan around that.
 
In the example in the issue (# 149), "referenceables" becomes a key that creates content that are a part of the message (but are themselves not actually messages) that the actual parts of the message can reference in a common way.
 
We would need to think about what the registry contains and looks like. Maybe it's a data structure or code. We have glossaries with words and declensions for every language, and can be managed be developers.
 
This proposal limits some functionality and flexibility, but gives us the possibility to handle each message as a separate entity. Are these concerns that you all recognize and share, so that we should spend time on?
 
RCA: Let's go to TCQ for questions.
 
MIH: I agree with the direction in trying to limiting things. I would need to think about whether this is the direction I would go, but to me, as the data model stands with allowing message references in the patterns takes us one step back from top-level selectors that allows us to have standalone messages. Without this restriction, we can construct unwieldy message constructions.
 
Question, as a translator, how am I supposed to deal with something like that complex one where one part of the sentence has to agree with another part of the sentence that become disjoint parts.
 
STA: I didn't address this, but referenceables become territory for the translators.
 
MIH: This totally breaks most localization tools. Most of them work on the model that you translate one string, you get one back.
 
STA: I realize that that's the challenge.
 
NIC: I can see the concern with messages with a lot of different variables.
 
EAO: STA, have you had a chance to read the reply I posted. Specifically, how do you form the registry? This becomes analogous to creating message references. I am concerned that this would add complexity without solving the real challenges that it is attempt to.
 
STA: You're right, you could probably hack this by making your entire message set into the registry. How would the registry be defined? You can make it a special set of messages. I haven't thought about whether we can allow references between things in the registry.
 
EAO: You did that that "Referenceables" can reference other Referenceables.
 
STA: Yes
 
EAO: We have a push and pull on how much the data model should allow or disallow to be represented. We have the possibility to create softer systems that allow people to work with the data model instead of completely working around it.
 
STA: My general attitude toward linter rules is that it's easy to delegate work off onto linters. Then you have capabilities that only are available to people who use the linters. I want to be the counter weight to the idea of relying on the linters to handle improvement to the standard, and instead put it directly into the standard.
 
MIH: How do we map this to XLIFF? If we don't support a mapping to XLIFF, then we revert back to the status quo of not supporting localization. 
 
One of the use cases that I've seen in the Firefox scene is to reuse company name or brand name and adding grammatical case information is not supported by this proposal.
 
STA: My idea of supporting this important use case (brand name reuse) is through the registry. There are special rules for updating the brand name in Mozilla, and it is handled tightly.
 
MIH: What is a registry?
 
STA: A global set of Referenceables that you can use in any message.
 
GWR: There is a notion of a registry in Siri. If I want to talk about the Mozilla tab or an iPhone, is it masculine or feminine, if it's Chinese it could be 1 form, in Finnish there could be 15 declensions. There could be metadata as well. It helps ensure uniformity.
 
There is information that might be useful for plural formatting, that might affect word order within a phrase.  In Siri, there might be a whole message in the registry, although we've discussed here in MFWG that referring to whole messages is not necessarily a good idea.
 
There are namespaces within the registry. There is information about whether a concept is bounded or unbounded, although that can be confusing to the translator.
 
There are times when I look up information from Knowledge Graph and need to display information like "The Eiffel Tower is x meters tall", and I need to know how to refer to teh Eiffel Tower.
 
 
MIH: My question is are you translating all of the information that you are describing (plural formatting, currency, units formatting)?  It would double the amount of information compared to what CLDR provides?
 
GWR: Yes, we started this before CLDR came out with the data, but CLDR still doesn't provide information about pronunciation.
 
DAF: I want to point out the connection to [issue 131](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/131). What is in the standard and what is in the repositories. What is in CLDR and not in CLDR. It's related to issue 149 about Referenceables.
 
MIH: I propose that we find a different name than registry, then.
 
DAF: It's just a pointer to issue 131 but we haven't had any discussion there, but these are related.
 
STA: Yes, of course, it's very related. I did refer to this when created issue 149. I am still wary of offloading too much functionality and responsibility to the registry. If we do, then we have to go and spend time specifying how that registry should work.
 
DAF: This proposal guarantees that different entities maintain their own data within the registry. And maybe this can help bring standardization over time.
 
RCA: Talking about the things that we have, maybe it would help to bring in other stakeholders, like people who do translation and work with translation tools. Maybe not now, maybe in a couple of months. It could help bring more perspective.
 
STA: I think we can discuss then when we know a little more about the data model. While this is still in progress, we can put this on hold. Then I could create a PR that could change the data model to allow this, etc.
 
RCA: We are talking about the implications of these decisions that would break interop with localization, but it could be could to have them verify that and/or tell us what we are missing.
 
EAO: We are conflating two things in talk of the registries: functions that live outside of the data model, and messages that reference other messages. The registries do not specify what the functions should look like.
 
MIH: That's why a name other than registry makes sense.
 
RCA: Can we decide on a consensus on the external selectors?
 
ECH: I just want to see a clear delineation of the consensuses (consensii?) that we are discussing. And if we are all in agreement, which I think we are since we waited and didn't have objections, we can go ahead and agree on them.
 
EAO: My understanding from the last meeting was to allow time for objections since we had otherwise reached consensus on these topics.
 
DAF: Thanks, EAO, you're right, I remember now. We were ready but there were fewer of us present, so we wanted to wait and give other people in the group chance to dissent.. 
 
EAO: I can write a PR that clearly lays out the consensuses and we can all agree upon it and merge it into a common place.
 
MIH: I am reluctant to just approve what we have currently since it is not clear with all the noise and changes. So EAO's proposal would be nice to have a clear communication for these important decisions.
 
STA: I struggle with the consensus verbiage "We will not block…" Isn't that implicit in the way we are working, and thus does not need to be specially called out?
 
EAO: That was from ZBI, and was about ensuring that other working groups don't block us.
 
ZBI: I see the decision on ____ can affect the design of the data model.
 
 
ZBI: I see that we are choosing top-level selectors because there is not enough evidence to show that anything more is needed.
 
STA: I'm still not convinced. It still seems that we're 
 
ZBI: I think this is the only decision in our group that has this implication. Nested selectors is the one thing large consequence and potentially may bring value but is easy to be blocked. But I don't see anything else in the scope of what we're talking about like this.
 
MIH: If I can try to explain, it's like the difference between saying "this is not allowed" versus we don't say that.  This is kind of in the middle, by saying, "we will not block this by mistake". The decision here is to be explicit in saying that we won't block this by mistake.
 
ZBI: Although I hear you saying so, STA, I don't think this type of impact is true for all decisions, it's only for this one decision.
 
STA: I don't think we should have a standard that specifically calls out a specific decision.
 
ZBI: Abn example is mathematical operators. We are not blocking them in MF 2, and leave it an open possibility.
 
STA: I still don't see how this is necessary to include in the standard or necessary in order to have the discussions and decision making that we would normally make.
 
ZBI: I agree that our discussions can happen just the same without this consensus, but it would be an acknowledgement of the months of discussions that we had on this topic, and this was a difficult consensus to come to. And in the future, it may not just be me who thinks the way I do, so that there will be an easy place to have the written out text of the conclusion of all that.
 
 
RCA: We will get these notes into a PR during the chair meeting as we decided. Also, we can get the notes for the task force for issue 130 in January as well https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P7qhnxUDUpD5AKpcQp_nfIYj2ZBDoXS8YspmN3eV3f8/edit# .
 
