#### [meeting transcription](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XXHSkxpJcZOuQk1ViwqrnAFG5i5Cx0YtzcdyVuzvfVg/edit?usp=sharing)

#### March 15, Meeting Attendees:
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Mihai Nita (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Luke Swartz - Google (LHS)
- Shane Carr (SFC)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Standa Rygal - Expedia (STR)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- David Filip - Huawei, OASIS XLIFF TC (DAF)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

April 19, 10am PDT (6pm GMT)

## Agenda
- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/148)

### Moderator : Nicolas Bouvrette
 
 
## Data Model Taskforce review [#140](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/140) [#141](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/141)
 
RCA: DLM, MIH, EAO, ECH, and ZBI have been working in these models and participating in several rounds of task force meetings recently. DLM will present.
 
DLM: Sharing this [presentation slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1tpKKw37-lice6zDuxb-gsTvDQ-7tURHIViwa_3q7dUs/edit#slide=id.gc5eb9fd624_0_169). Broadly, we started with 4 data models. We're down to 2. Between them, only a handful of divergences. Presentation is a summary of the work done in these task force meetings.
 
One approach is to start with a smaller model and add things only when we need to. Another approach is to create a more expressive model that is future-proof but can allow things that are undesirable. Don't want to spend much time on this.
 
Next question is whether the data model should place limits on translators. No limits in the data model: provides greater flexibility, and allows building tools for different use cases. Having limits simplifies the mental model for translators and hides or prevents complexity.
 
Next question is regarding XLIFF mapping. The question is about allowing multiple possible mappings. ALlowing multiple possible mappings can potentially support multiple use cases. Having a single canonical mapping makes a consistent round-tripping to XLIFF and back.
 
Next question is constraints on function arguments. Can a function take a mix of literal value arguments and function arguments? Not allowing this mix of types simplifies translation and XLIFF transformation. Allowing this mix of types enables function composition, which enables a wider range of expressions in conjunction with a nested structure.
 
EAO: A clarifying question (comment) of why these questions are the open questions presented. We have 2 remaining data models, and we need to figure out how to merge these and come up with one single consensus. We've met 8 times and met an impasse. We have other questions, but 3 questions are considered the primary / representative ones -- resolving these will address a large part of the open points. We haven't prepared exactly how this will go, but now is the time to share opinions.
 
LHS: What, if any, limitations do we agree on wrt data model? I will say what I think the current state of thinking is. I thought that earlier on, we agreed that as a committee, we are not trying to represent the full expressiveness of human language, and we can limit ourselves. It seems like this is the difference between the 2 different models. What do we think?
 
EAO: Both models have ways of expressing anything that is reasonable to express. One model can express things less clumsy than another. One allows more of these expressions to be represented in the data model, and the other defers representation to supporting functions in a registry.
 
MIH: I have seen messages in Google where the message is like "how is the weather" and the select message is based on "weather_type" and "weather_type = sunny => It is sunny; weather_type = rainy => Take an umbrella;, …" Some of this logic doesn't belong in MessageFormat, it belongs in the code you write in your programming language.
 
EAO: One tries to estimate what is appropriate for a message,a nd tries to limit the data model accordingly. The other model doesn't limit what is allowed, and provides the minimal tools to make things possible.
 
MIH: Just to note, none of the data models are final. These are the proposals. We can go to features requested in Github issues, we will try to implement, and iterate.
 
LHS: Is there an example that will help illustrate the difference?
 
MIH: If you go back in the slides to the French example, the difference is captured here.  In the more flexible model, the translator has the ability to modify the 2nd example. In the less permissive model, the translator is only able to modify a message with the 2nd example unless the developer creates a function that can support modification of values.
 
STA: Who can add the AddHonorific fn in this example?
 
EAO: Developer
 
MIH: In this one, it's the developer because you have a "user" object. But you can define registries for things like plurals and grammatical cases.
 
STA: The "full control" has me thinking that the translator can modify arguments but not create arbitrary functions.
 
RCA: Yes, no inversion of control here.
 
SFC: In this example, whether there should be an honorific applied is a question for the translation style guide, not for the translator to decide. Is that correct?
 
MIH: The style guide is something that changes per language.
 
EAO: The question is whether the data model should allow this or not.
 
GRH: For us, whether you are trying to be informal or formal depends on the client application, and it is language-specific.
 
LHS: To respond to SFC's comment, I agree with your general thrust, this is a specific thing that has shown up in Google products a lot. It differs from German to French to etc. It seems like the developers have to do some work to make the family name available. Either way, the developer has to do some work.
 
ZBI: SFC, I think your approach is correct, but it is project-specific. We are not talking about what should be done, but rather, what data model we should choose to allow for these options.
 
MIH: In a way, that's exactly the problem. In the option of allowing the translator to specify whether to apply an honorific name function, it is like current MessageFormat v1 where users can specify options to date formatting, but users need to know that function exists. Developers can specify what to do in a fallback scenario. It's like providing skeletons versus patterns.
 
EAO: It is not a matter of what should be done, but whether that level of restriction should be encoded in the data model.
 
LHS: To respond to MIH's point, I think some of what MIH is talking about could be mitigated by better translation tools. 
 
I want to get to the question about letting translators have a mechanism for providing feedback. It frequently happens that translators need pieces of information in the message that doesn't exist.
 
EAO: Yes, enabling more expressive power to solve some cases also means exposing extra arguments that must be configured in common cases that don't need it.
 
RCA: We should have clearer actions on what to do here. We should discuss this offline and have a better conclusion on this. We are trying to consider all points of view, but I don't have a clear vision of the pros and cons for how these help and impact developers and translators. Maybe we should have a separate meeting just to discuss the pros and cons? Should we spend the rest of the meeting discussing these use cases?
 
SFC: As a point of order, let's let everyone express their points without trying to directly respond, so that the task force members can hear everyone's input and know what the constraints are.
 
SFC: The question that I would like the task group to consider offline. Are there security concerns? If you rely on functions that are offline, does applying them require something like "eval" like in JavaScript `eval`? Because that would have security concern implications.
 
ZBI: It is not like `eval`. Fluent has done this, and it is nothing like eval.
 
SFC: I just want this to be documented.
 
STA: This discussion is reminiscent of the discussion last year about developer vs. translator control. The dichotomy is flexibility vs. limits, i.e. expressiveness at the risk of added complexity vs. having a less expressive solution that follows the principle of least power. Have we decided as a group where on the spectrum we see ourselves?  
 
I think that our job should be to design this as limiting as possible, not more. I think it is worth it for us to have this discussion.
 
MIH: Main difference in the “philosophy”
- as limiting as possible, but not more
- as flexible as possible, because we don't know what the future brings
 
ZBI: As one of the task force members, it is easy to get caught in between looking at very specific immediate problems and looking at long-term high-level problems. We wanted to provide to the rest of the group a scaffolding of a solution, but it is not intended to be complete and detailed. Instead, there are tradeoffs that have to be made, and you will have to consider them on your own time, in order to evaluate which tradeoffs are preferable to the others.
 
SFC: One of the biggest reasons for the first question -- whether you have functions or options -- one of the reasons to have the translators to have configurable options but not configurable functions is that ______,
 
I have been increasingly convinced that to build the data model that gives power to the translators, that is advantageous. What are the unique advantages of the options-based model but still gives power to translators. I believe that linting tools can play a role here. I see how there is a desire to have translators to work in a sandbox but also give them control. Maybe there is a model that can let them do both.
 
EAO: A link I posted _____ shows how XLIFF messages can be created that allow translators to translate the same things using the functions as using options for predefined functions.
 
LHS: I can understand ZBI that those not in the task force can't immediately have the full context of those discussions, but I am happy to meet with you all and document something as concise as possible to give the committee the proper context. We need a way for people to get that context.
 
RCA: Point of order, since we are running out of time, maybe we can take up the agenda item of the 2021 Roadmap next meeting, and we discuss that offline in the meantime. Then we spend the remaining time on the Unicode Conf presentation. Okay?  Okay, no objections, thanks.
 
STA: In the honorific example, in the options-only approach, why does supporting this need to go back to the developer?
 
MIH: You have to communicate somehow to the developer that the option is available.
 
STA: That is true for the functions-also approach, translators need to know it exists, too.
 
MIH: Either way, you need a mechanism indicating that the option is available, and that mechanism must exist outside of the message.
 
STA: In both of the examples regarding honorifics in the presentation slide, that problem exists.
 
MIH: The crux of the question is not just how do you communicate to the translator, but how do you communicate to the translation tool, too. If you have a message in the Translation Memory that uses honorific, you cannot leverage that message if you don't support it.
 
STA: Thanks for the slide deck. The discussion that followed was great as well. I would like to get a 3 minute summary, yet again. After an hour of discussing, it would be good to review the questions under consideration.
 
SFC: +1 to what MIH was saying about the translation tool should be able to know what options and functions are available. The translation tool is so far away in the stack that it might be possible for it to get overlooked, but I think that is non-negotiable.
 
I think if we go with the functions approach, we have to come up with a way to express all the things that come with functions. Functions are a more complicated concept to represent declaratively, and I'm perfectly fine with the functions approach, but coming up with a way to make it possible to fully convey in the translation tool is something that the task force should consider.
 
EAO: The task force considered more than just the 3 or 4 questions here, we discussed 10 or so questions. But these 3-4 questions were chosen because they drive much of the conversation.
 
RCA: We could have a Github issue to represent. Should we have a single issue for all questions, or a separate issue per question? Vote / speak up.
 
RCA: Based on the responses, let's discuss the questions together in a single issue.
 
RCA: We haven't brought into the conversation of MessageFormat 2.0 other stakeholder groups like translators and industry participants (ex: tooling).
 
ZBI: Those groups are not good at predicting what they want or need. If you ask a question, you get no answer or an uninformed answer. Maybe we can have another round where we put in front of them what we come up with and see whether it works for them and how, and incorporate that feedback into the next iteration.
 
MIH: I agree with ZBI that for translators, putting prototypes in front of them will work well. But we also need participation of people from the tooling side, DAF is one such example, but we need more representation.
 
EAO: One approach is that we have a limited data model that can be easily mapped to XLIFF, and to use XLIFF extensions where needed. Another approach is to make the data model more of an enabler than a limiter, and we will have other parts (ex: translation to XLIFF) based on the data model, but those layers of transformations will not impose limitations on what the data model can represent.
 
RCA: We can close this topic for now, and we already agreed that we will continue discussing offline.
 
 
## Roadmap MF 2021 [#157](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/157)
 
 
 
## Unicode Conf - MFWG Presentation
 
ECH: What should we propose to talk about? Who wants to speak?
 
RCA: I think we will be further along this year than last year.
 
ZBI: I believe we should be around v 1.0 of MessageFormat 2.0 around the time of the conference. I don't like making project timelines based around conference dates. We have made a lot of progress on the data model, and by that time, we might even be working on the syntax / implementation.
 
So I believe that we will have made a lot of progress and have something concrete to present by then. Unless you think we will be working in a long multi year process on MF 2.0, then I think it is reasonable to 
 
RCA: Any volunteers on the abstract? We can discuss this through the Slack channel.
 
 
RCA: Other topics? EAO proposed changing the plenary cadence to once per two weeks. I think we can keep it at once a month.
 
MIH: I think we can keep it once a month. We already haven't seen recent attendance from Amazon, eBay, etc.
 
RCA: Also, the plenary isn't necessarily where the most productive work happens.  Any ideas?
 
STA: I would also love to see the pace increase, and I think this is a very important period. Everyone would agree that we want to see more discussions happen asynchronously on Github, and the nature of the discussions don't lend themselves to Github. I think they work better synchronously.
 
I think, maybe for the next 3 months, we have 2-week meetings, that would help keep the pace. Also, for the benefit of people in other time zones, having one of those meetings at a different time would help.
 
DAF: What STA said makes sense in the short-term, like he said, because these complex topics warrant extra discussion. And some of those task force meetings could benefit from the context of a decision making (or larger) meeting to unblock some of the discussions.
 
ZBI: I agree that it is a critical time. I am not as concerned about dropoff because this isn't a time to join in the middle of these detailed discussions. Maybe have the plenary meeting once every 2 weeks and a rapid huddle task force meeting on the data model every 2 weeks. But the reason why we couldn't resolve the questions in the task force is because the questions are all intertwined.
 
RCA: I will schedule extra meetings to occur in between the existing monthly meetings. The invite will go out to the mailing list.
 
[Here is the link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XXHSkxpJcZOuQk1ViwqrnAFG5i5Cx0YtzcdyVuzvfVg/edit?usp=sharing) to the auto-recorded transcriptions.
