# 28 April 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Daniel Gleckler (DAG)  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO) - acting chair 
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)

**Scribe:** MIH  

##  Pull Requests

###  1072 Fix unpaired surrogate in test

Has 3 approvals, squash and merge

###  1071 Currency and unit conformance

MED: The `:`` currency` `` function must treat the option as if it was an uppercase value.

MED: we are describing the behavior of the `:`` currency` `` function  
Other functions don’t see into it

EAO: The result of a `:`` currency` `` function can be passed to a different function, including the bag of options

MIH: when you do function chaining

EAO:

```  
.local $x  \= { 42 :currency currency=eur}  
.local $y \= { $x :x:convert target=usd}  
{{...}}  
```

In the example above the `` `:x:convert` `` function “sees” the output of `:`` currency` ``, including the options.`:`` currency` ``

MED: it feels very weird to have `:`` currency` `` change the option

MIH: we didn’t specify what functions do to their own options. We specified how they treat the options for themselves, but not how they modify the options for chaining.

MED: this is getting very complex  
Every function would have to specify how they modify their own options, if they do

EAO: I think we have already done that  
I can dig for the exact wording.

MIH: I think that if a function after chaining looks at the currency option, they should know about the fact that it is an ISO currency code, and it is case insensitive.  
So there is no need to modify it for them.

MED: example

```  
.local $x  \= { 42 :foo digitSize=03}  
.local $y \= { $x :x:stringLength source=digitSize}  
```

Do we expect:  
$y \= 2 or 1??

EAO: we are not digging in the “internals” of `` `:foo` ``.  
But we document what its resolved value AND resolved options are.

MED: let’s say I’m writing a programming language. It means that all the values I’m passing to a function are always writable. I know we don’t design a programming language.

EAO: I don’t think that’s the case in what we are doing here.

TIM: I think that in our case `` `:foo` `` returns a new value. It is not necessarily changing the input value.

MED: if we do that we have to be very careful to say what the default behavior is.  
And that would be: pass it on as you got it.

EAO: the spec does not document a default behavior.  
For the JS each function must specify the behavior if it can be used as a value that can be passed to another function.

DAG: makes sense to leave that open, for flexibility, But it might case trouble if there is no baseline recommendation.  
If the keys in the output don’t match the input, you should not change them unless you need to.  
And if you need to you must document it.  
I would be very annoyed if the behavior changes when I move between implementations

MED: it is dangerous for usability and interoperability.

EAO: the only thing we have now is a non-normative note.

EAO: what I’m hearing from you guys is that this non-normative note should be normative?

MED: we can say that the output options don’t have any relation with the input options.  
OR we can say that it is what was the input, unless specified by the function.

EAO: the ICU implementations do they define this behavior? Changing the options?

MIH: the Java options does not change the options.

EAO:  
```  
.local $x \= {42 :number minimumFractionDigits=2}  
.local $y \= {$x :integer}  
.local $z \= {$y :x:foo}  
{{...}}  
```

MED:  
```  
.local $x \= {42 :number minimumFractionDigits=02}  
**.local $y \= {$x :x:accessOptionValue source=digitSize}**  
```

Is $y 02 or 2?

Right now I think we are underspecified.  
In a way that someone doing function chaining do something that is not portable between implementations.

I think “you always know what you are going to get” should be the behavior.

MED:  
Options:  
1\. functions they never muck with their options’ values (Mark’s preference)  
	1\. They can hide the \<option,value\> pair (make inaccessible by chained functions)  
2\. they can muck with them, but clearly documented  
3\. the arbitrarily muck with them, no documentation

EAO:  
We can require option 2 for the standard functions  
We can’t really do it on a custom function

MED: we can require it  
We already require certain things from custom functions.  
We can choose different options (behavior, see above) for standard / custom functions.

TIM: it is tempting to do “type coercion”  
But it is not that useful  
The next function (after chaining) might get the options from anywhere, not only chained.  
So it must understand the uppercase / lowercase option anyway (in the currency example)

EAO: in the functions we already have (`` `:string` ``, `` `:number` ``, `` `:integer` ``) we already specify  
\* `` `:string` ``  \= everything goes away  
\* `` `:number` `` \= nothing changes, everything is passed to the output  
\* `` `:integer` `` \= we specify a few operand options that we don’t include in the output

EAO: if we continue to have something like the `` `:math` `` function, a consumer of the chained result should still see something like `` `add` `` on it?

DAG: With option 1 you don’t have to have everything output(ed), but if you do, it must be unchanged.

MIH: my vote would be option 2

EAO: we can’t force that on custom functions

MIH: we can say must, and if they break that is their problem

DAG: we can say must, and custom functions can choose to be non-compliant

EOA: can we say should?

EAO: MIH or TIM, can you update the comment to PR 1071 with the behavior you expect?

TIM: I’ll do that

###  1070 Allow clamping of digit size options

MIH: I think that the clamped value should be passed to the next, but that is not currently documented.  
My preference is to change the option, and document it.

DAG: I think that if you are the next function in the chain, then you can take that input from the original input.  
The thing you are checking on, is effectively the new option.

EAO: I think that the language here is sufficient, that if the value is clamped, then the option becomes 42\. Because it says it “replaces”

Question from Shane: if clamping happens, is an error reported, at any level?

EAO: the current wording says that we return the same error, “Bad Option”

EAO: can you (MIH) add some language saying that all functions getting an invalid option report the same error? “Bad Option”

MIH: Will do that

##  ACTION ITEMS:

TIM: wording for behavior when clamping (change the option for the next function in chain)

MIH: wording about all functions reporting the same error for invalid options (“Bad Option”)  
