# 11 August 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)

**Scribe:** MIH

## Mark dataflow-composability design doc as obsolete (PR \#1092)

EAO: Should have merged this a while ago
Thumbs up from more people.
Submitted

## Preparations for LDML 48 release (PR \#1096)

EAO: editorial fixes
This includes scripts that will generate and publish the rendered version of the spec.

MIH: would have been nice to separate the scripts from the spec differences

MIH: also nice to not have PRs showing up over the week-end and submit on Monday. Some people might want to have a week-end 🙂

Thumbs up from more people.
Submitted

This is where the rendered spec is now published: [https://unicode-org.github.io/message-format-wg/](https://unicode-org.github.io/message-format-wg/)

## Add :percent (PR \#1094)

_Our primary focus will be on seeing if we can land PR \#1094, adding :percent as a draft function. At this week's meeting, this was identified as the only remaining change we're considering for inclusion in the LDML 48 version of the spec._

SFC: I reviewed it before other comments and changes, not after. But fine with the direction.

MIH: same as SFC, read it before changes. No blocker from me.

TIM: OK to merge.

Thumbs up from more people.
Submitted

## LDML 48

_Anything else blocking publication?_

EAO: do we have any blockers for 48?

SFC: the :percent and :datetime are both draft, right

EAO: are semantic skeletons getting out of tech preview in LDML 48?

SFC: it is in icu4x, I might push in that direction. But I didn’t have it on my agenda to do.

EAO: we can’t really push semantic skeletons out of draft in MF2 if it is not out of tech preview in LDML

SFC: I will put it on the CLDR agenda

## Looking Forwards

_We need to start looking forwards, and plan our work beyond the LDML 48 release. We have an updated list of [goals](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md), and I think it's time to start doing something about these two in particular:_

- _Define a standard vocabulary for expression attributes and message properties/metadata, to enable better interoperation between translation tools and platforms._
- _Incubate and support working groups or interest groups that promote adoption of Unicode MessageFormat, such as the proposed working group to develop a standard message resource format, i.e. a new file format for bundles or collections of messages._

_We do of course also need to improve our documentation site and fill out the default function set, but we ought to look beyond those as well._

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md)

EAO: What are we going to do next?
I mentioned a few in the email.

### Machine readable function description

MIH: machine readable function description to be consumed by linters, IDEs, CAT tools

EAO: I have something similar to do for Mozilla, updating tools to parse and validate message sources into a data model.
Another person that expressed interest was Luca (LCA).
So there is some opportunity here.
We ought to figure out a time for EAO / LCA / MIH to get together and decide how to go ahead about that.
TIM, do you have any interest in this?

TIM: not for now

### Vocabulary for Attributes

EAO: figuring out attributes
We now allow them in placeholders and markup.
But the empty namespace is reserved.
Would be really useful to define some basic meanings that can be used.

EAO: preliminary message bundle work: [https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg/issues/19](https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg/issues/19)
Message and expression level attributes.
That connects with validation and linting.
Attributes like “example”.

MIH: I think most of these attributes belong outside the message, in the “wrapper” (storage)

EAO: for the vast majority of cases I would agree.

MIH: for translator access to attributes: hidden, read-only, enum, free-form, maybe regexp. Relevant for leveraging or not.
In my mind this kind of stuff belongs in the machine readable function description.
If this changes per message, probably still outside the message, not inside (think structured comments, or XML attributes, or other existing mechanisms)

EAO: we can collect use cases, then we decide where they belong.

### XLIFF Mapping

MIH: XLIFF mapping, but in a way that is backward compatible with existing CAT tools (that understand XLIFF, but know nothing about MF2).

EAO: I have something in the JS implementation, might be worth taking a look.

### Maintain and develop the documentation

EAO: maintaining doc, links to examples, implementations, etc.
Can we find some bandwidth to improve things here?
Hopefully each of us can find a bit of time to

EAO: adoption, promotion

### Compatibility with MF1

EAO: The people in the room working on ICU, can you take a look at this?

MIH: I will
But not the next week or two :-)
Most likely after ICU 78 release.

EAO: create individual issues for everything missing, so that we can close them as we solve them.

### Message resource format incubation

EAO: I have a strong interest in this.

MIH: I have little interest in this. Most likely belongs somewhere like ECMAScript or W3C, or in some tech stack that does not have such a format.
If the result of that is “amazing” then some other tech stacks will adopt it.

EAO: maybe IETF?

RGN: they would probably not care

MIH: Another option might be OASIS, which had a lot of work done in the l10n standards space (XLIFF, TMX, word counting).
This is where XLIFF is: [https://github.com/oasis-tcs/xliff-xliff-22](https://github.com/oasis-tcs/xliff-xliff-22)

RGN: maybe ECMA?

### Action Items

ALL: Update the documentation site: [https://github.com/unicode-org/messageformat.dev](https://github.com/unicode-org/messageformat.dev)

MIH:

- Send an email to the XLIFF TC, ask if there is interest in a file format, and mapping MF2 to XLIFF, CC EAO
- Add links to mapping for HTML, Java Properties, and Windows .RC
  - MIH: faulty memory, was not about Windows RC files, was about gettext .po files:
    - XLIFF 1.2 Representation Guide for Java Resource Bundles:
      [https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-java/xliff-profile-java-v1.2.html](https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-java/xliff-profile-java-v1.2.html)
    - XLIFF 1.2 Representation Guide for Gettext PO:
      [https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-po/xliff-profile-po-1.2.html](https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-po/xliff-profile-po-1.2.html)
    - XLIFF 1.2 Representation Guide for HTML:
      [https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-html/xliff-profile-html-1.2.html](https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/v1.2/xliff-profile-html/xliff-profile-html-1.2.html)
- Update the ICU4J implementation

TIM: Update the ICU4C implementation

EAO:

- Cancel the meetings scheduled for 2025-08-18 and 2025-09-01
- Submit spec for inclusion in LDML 48
- Coordinate with MIH & LCA on initial requirements for machine readable registry definition
- File PR adding preliminary attribute/metadata definitions
- File PR adding message resource explainer for its incubation
