# 8 September 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)

**Scribe:** MIH

## Updates from Implementers

EAO: LDML 48 will be on the TC agenda this Wednesday. Hopefully no issues and will be accepted “as is”.

TIM: no changes to the implementation lately. Talked with Mihai about function composition. No agreement yet. Will probably not be in the next release.

MIH: Proposed for the C++ and Java APIs to be different, and for C++ to follow TIM’s current proposal. I am working on updating the Java implementation. Code reviews advancing slowly.

EAO: Could you explain a bit more about the differences between C++ and Java?

MIH: In Java, factory methods produce formatters / selectors. \[...\] The proposal was to unify the C++ & Java implementations (API looking the same). The core difference was in where transformations would happen; in the factories or as instance methods. In my opinion, cross-boundary implementations are much easier to implement if only data moves around, and not whole class instances. In C++, there’s also special-casing for how the standard functions are constructed.

EAO: In a browser using ICU4C, a C++ implementation would have to interact with custom JavaScript functions.

MIH: for ICU we have an extra week, postponed because of the CLDR integration going bad.  
The bottleneck seems to be reviewers.

EAO: JavaScript implementation is on track. JS can format based on the data model. The Typescript we have for the data model describes options as maps, while the json schema uses JS objects to represent these. With the json schema one can parse and pass json directly to the MF constructor.

## Default Attribute Definitions

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098)

EAO: adding some default attributes to the spec. This is just opening up the discussion about attributes. Probably another folder under the `spec/` folder, similar to what we have for functions.

EAO: so attributes with reserved names (no namespaces, etc) we define what they mean so that they can be used. Where they show up: expressions and markup. I also introduce attributes that apply to the whole message. It goes beyond what the MF2 spec covers, but it is important in order to use MF2. The 4-th place to use attributes would go beyond that, to groups of messages like resources/files. These are left out of this, initially.

EAO: I invite you to take a look at these things. Should we define default / common attributes? Should we do this? And is this a good subset of attributes to define? What do we define the attributes for? Should we only do expressions and markup, or other spaces?

EAO: the proposed attributes (in the PR) mostly adds attributes that exist in XLIFF.

MIH: I don’t think I would use attributes (or anything inside the message) for localization “directives”

EAO: ok… so one idea is to use the `u:id` to “link” to expressions. Maybe the `u:id` can be non-unique.

EAO: but this is a start, we will see how far we can take this.

EAO: Addison left a lot of comments on this PR. I would appreciate it if others also review it.

## Issue Triage/Review

### Clarifications needed on the XLIFF mapping \#169

EAO: Can we close it as out of scope?

EAO: MIH, did you talk to the OASIS workgroup?

EAO: Can you add a comment on issue \#169?

## Overall planning for LDML 49

EAO: What do you think we should prioritize?

MIH: everything date-time related: semantic skeletons, hour12, time zone, etc. And units.

---

SKIP NEXT WEEK (September 15\)
