# 14 July 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)

**Scribe:** TIM  
**Previous Scribe:** \-

## Actions

- TIM to update \#1084  
- EAO to update \#1068 to move current proposed solution to a candidate, so that the design doc can be merged as “proposed”. See discussion below about introducing a `:percent` function.  
- EAO to email the WG about stepping up as chair, and if not opposed, take the proposal to the CLDR-TC.  
- MIH and others to review \#1083, hopefully to merge next week.  
- MIH and SFC to consider proposing an alternative to the `hour12=true|false` option.  
- MIH to review whether \#1005 is still relevant

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1087 | Rename :math tests as :offset tests | Merge (fast-track) |
| \#1084 | Fix contradiction in markup resolution | Waiting on action from Tim |
| \#1068 | Design document for percent formatting | Merge |

### #1076 expErrors

_From the 2025-07-07 meeting, for which notes were not otherwise taken._

(discussion of details, some ad hoc edits, and a merge)

(Need to file issue on step 7 and/or documentation)


### #1087

EAO: OK to put this in?

MIH, TIM: OK

### #1084

EAO: Comment from me 

TIM: Have been on leave, will work on it asap

### #1068

EAO: What do we want to do about this? There’s been some discussion on the data slicing issue and at least for me, a relevant thing I finally realized is that the term “quantity” means a very specific thing and the unit spec in the LDML is split into part 1 and part 6, and the categorization in part 1 is effectively deprecated by the categorization in part 6\. This had me confused. The word “portion” that Shane had mentioned is coming from the “quantity” way of categorizing units. That all kind of makes sense. None of this is feeling like it’s going to get us to a quick resolution. I’m inclined to think maybe we want to do a `:percent`. If percent is so special, maybe we need to do something different from any other unit rather than mixing it in with number or integer formatting and just make a `:percent` function. This is not a fully complete thought, just the vibe I’m tending towards.

MIH: The thing that bothers me about inventing a new function is that we’re going to end up with tons of small functions that take pretty much the same parameters. The same parameters we have on `:number`, we’ll also have on `:percent` and probably units. Fractional digits, rounding, etc. Feels ugly. It’s not a blocker necessarily, it’s just one thing that doesn’t make me happy. Not enough to say I’ll oppose it. What attracts me more in a way is having an option on the number formatter to say “you can format this as a percentage thing”. That would be the simple thing, and then in `:unit` we can do per-thousands, per-millions, and so on. In the implementation, I would add one function doing everything anyway.

EAO: Implementation-wise, we’re going to de-duplicate

MIH: But it just feels “meh”. Not necessarily a blocker.

EAO: On one side is the argument that it’s not special compared to other units; on the other side is the argument that it is special and we should handle it specially.

MIH: We have the same idea about currency, which is kind of a unit, but you can’t convert

EAO: There you end up with a similar sort of split, where the stuff in ECMA-402 in Intl.NumberFormat is under style, where each of those ends up with their own function. We’re already designing at least one `:unit` and `:currency` function. Having a separate `:percent` function matches what’s happening there. Looking at the number options, we’ve got `select`, which does not apply to percent, `signDisplay`, which rarely applies –

MIH: Rarely, but you can’t exclude it from the spec because it’s rare

EAO: We’re going to end up with some sort of unit formatting; if we end up doing a special percent thing, what would be the things that would fill up the 90% or 99% use cases? For that, we could leave out the vast majority of the options. Then you end up with something like – with `:integer`, we have (list of options) as the only options there. It’s a smaller set than the whole of everything.

MIH: I was against splitting `:integer` from `:number` to begin with. I can buy that one.

EAO: That one I see hoping to get specific benefits in Pontoon out of integer and number being separate, because most values are really integers.

MIH: It’s more useful in JS, because in Java and C you have real integers; if I give you an integer type, you format as an integer.

EAO: What I mean is at translation time, the translator can know that the value will always be an integer, and you can leave out one of the plural cases.

TIM: Is option of making a separate function already in the design doc?

EAO: Last comment here is a month ago, we’ve had a bunch of discussion since then. I’m not sure if us trying to continue in that whole big thread is –

MIH: I can buy a percent function. If we go that way I would feel strongly about having currency separate from units, because currencies really don’t feel like units.

EAO: There’s overlap as well, because once you get into Euros per liter, you can convert to Euros per gallon. I think there is even an expression language in LDML for how to do that kind of a unit. 

MIH: Technically you can say yeah but what about “10% gallons more”?

EAO: The design doc does have one of the alternatives as “use a dedicated `:percent` function”.

MIH: What do you think about merging this? In the end it’s a design document, it’s not making the decision.

EAO: The proposed design in the doc at the moment is to support formatting percents through the `:unit` formatter, and require the `:number` and `:integer` function to support `style=percent`. Not that we’re discussing right now, but to take the discussion forward, it might be easiest to land this PR and then iterate from there. Discussion has 80+ comments right now.

MIH: How messy is it to take out the decision part of the design doc? 

EAO: The contents of the proposed design are included separately. The combined thing of having both `:unit` and `:number` is not there. Are we OK modifying the design doc so we take the proposed design and move it to the alternatives. (OK) I’ll make the edit and land it.

## Topic: Status of chair

*Addison is stepping down as the chair. Eemeli has volunteered to step up. The WG needs to approve this change and recommend it to the TC.*

EAO: We need a new chair. I told Addison I could do this job. I would prefer for Addison to continue, but if that’s not an option, this is where we’re at. So I guess the question is, are you all cool with it?

SFC: Chair remains an equal delegate like everyone else, right? With additional responsibility, not necessarily additional power.

EAO: Something like that

MIH: There is extra power, like it or not

EAO: There is extra power in being the secretary of the meeting, as well

EAO: Given that we are only four people here, I think I’m going to need to check with Addison about how to proceed on this, but also need to send an email to the mailing list to see if anybody has opinions or would prefer some other alternative solution.

MIH: I’m totally fine if you want to step up as chair, because the people that are really invested in this are the people in this room right now

EAO: I’ll check with the mailing list and we’ll see how the CLDR TC handles it; it’s their decision rather than ours.

MIH: Other than someone from there stepping up and taking over, there are not many options, right?

EAO: I don’t expect the bureaucratic minutiae to take a lot of my time. I don’t expect to change much about how we run the meetings.

## Topic: v48 datetime/date/time formatting

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1078 | Define time zone values and conversions | Discuss |
| \#1083 | Include :date, :datetime, and :time with minimal options | Discuss |
| \#1077 | Include :datetime, :date, and :time with style options only | Superseded by \#1083 |
| \#1067 | Semantic skeletons design | Discuss |

MIH: I’m kind of OK with the last proposal you (EAO) had. We promised MF is going to do what the old MF does. Unless it’s incorrect. Then people who use one of those forms are going to be unhappy to get different results. Shane basically said, and I checked myself, that there are no extra fields between the locales, but the length might vary. Technically, you can’t do what you did with MF 1\.

EAO: This brings up something else I need to check on with the CLDR TC, which is what are the goals that we’re promising, because they’re getting updated and the text we proposed has some specific language about this. One key part is that we have never strictly promised everything with MF1 will work with MF2.

MIH: I think we kind of promised. Not in syntax, and we explicitly said we’re not going to do stuff that’s clearly bad i18n.

EAO: In the original goals that we had and deliverables, we do not actually mention anything about ICU MF compatibility. In the updated goals, which I think we’re still waiting for the CLDR TC to approve, we have a goal to support migration and adoption by publishing as stable a default function set and options to support compatibility with ICU MF. Note that some features have been excluded because they are unique to MF1 or will be superseded. (lists out the features)

MIH: Why did we exclude ordinal?

EAO: We’re not promising it

MIH: Why not?

EAO: Data size; also JS doesn’t have an implementation.

MIH: We don’t promise … but I think a lot of people will be unhappy with it. If we say how to move from MF1 to MF2, and then you discover it doesn’t work the same, you will be unhappy. When we have an ICU update in Google, something like “French decided to do this differently on dates”, it will cause a lot of failures and people ask why you changed it. This happens twice a year. 

EAO: What it’s sounding to me like is that some work should be done deciding what goes into the `icu:` namespace, but Unicode MF2 in the default stable set of things does not support these things, or is unlikely to support them. That means we’ve explicitly left a space for the ICU MF2 implementation to have `icu:` things it supports, and then you can have complete compatibility with MF1.

MIH: Although I would expect JS to be the same back-end

EAO: No, because JS does not have a pre-existing MessageFormat

MIH: But it does have a date/time and timeStyle, yes? In the date formatter

EAO: Yes, but we already moved away from having all the functions be exact copies of the JS functions. We’re already in a state of affairs where the API in JS for what will hopefully become `Intl.MessageFormat` is different from the API for `NumberFormat` or `DateTimeFormat`. In that way, we’ve already bitten the bullet. 

EAO: To get back on track, \#1078 before we get to the rest of the date/time. \#1078 is time zone option values. I updated this a bunch earlier today, so I don’t know if anyone has noticed any of the changes there. It’s a short PR. What is currently in the PR is that the special value of the time zone option that is included is no longer local, but is currently called “input”. The explanation for the option goes that the default value for the time zone is what is provided by the formatting context. `input` refers to the time zone of the operand. If it’s omitted, a “bad time zone” error is emitted and the input time zone is used to format the operand. (continues reading from the PR). Given the late changes, I’m not expecting to be able to land this today. Any thoughts?

MIH: Looks reasonable. I’m not crazy about “input” as a name, but I don’t have a better one.

SFC: What you’ve just described sounds plausible. I’m glad it leaves the option open for implementations that don’t support time zone conversions like ICU4X. With ICU4X we would like to support everything that’s a “SHOULD”. I think it’s possible that ICU4X MF could have a plug-in so that if you have a time zone provider, maybe there’s something you can do when you construct the message formatter. I don’t know if you necessarily want to rely on that behavior. In ICU4X we will only be supporting the Temporal types. The main use case for having this auto-conversion is in JS or Java and having the old-style date types.

MIH: It’s also useful even with the modern stuff. If I say in the MessageFormat, “show this in Pacific Standard Time”, and with input you give me New York time, what I would expect as a user is “show it the way I told you to show it in MessageFormat”. 

SFC: Can you articulate a use case for the message having an opinion about the time zone, rather than the input?

MIH: I send a message from the server saying “the meeting is at 07:00 GMT”, and I would want to see that in my local time zone.

SFC: But why is the time zone in the message?

EAO: I think Shane is saying “why not do this in the code that is calling into MessageFormat?” It’s possible to do exactly what you’re describing by doing the conversion before you call MessageFormat with the strings.

MIH: Yes, you can, but it depends on the language and framework. In a lot of places, like templates, you don’t run code. 

SFC: I get all that; what I’m saying is that the time zone is not something the message generally should define. The message is indexed by the language or locale; that doesn’t identify what time zone the message should be in. 

MIH: I would argue one strong use case is “my own time zone”. Maybe I don’t want to say “format this in Pacific Daylight Time”, but I see a good use case for showing it to me in the current thing, whichever that is, which has nothing to do with the locale. I can be in the US and have my language set to French and want to see the time zone as California.

EAO: This is actually making at least me realize that we need another special value for time zone, like “default” or “system” or “local”, which would enforce that what is presented is in the default time zone of the formatting context.

MIH: Might be.

SFC: That still seems like something that should happen in code outside of MessageFormat. MessageFormat can signal to use the system time zone but there’s no way to access it. ICU also doesn’t have access to that. ICU4X doesn’t, at least. ECMA doesn’t have access to it. Only if you run it in non-secure mode. By default, it doesn’t have access to it, because of SES. The system time zone is one of those bits of information that’s locked down and a lot of implementations won’t be able to access it. 

EAO: So in JS, I can write `new Intl.DateTimeFormat.resolvedOptions` and get a time zone of “Europe/Helsinki”

SFC: It comes from the same place as a locale

EAO: So this is the time zone from the POV of MessageFormat that we’re interested in; if that happens to be different from the system time zone, it’s the user’s problem. But there is a default value.

SFC: The locale is an input to the message formatter, always, right?

EAO: Depends on the implementation.

SFC: What I’m saying is, if a formatter has a system time zone available, that’s on top of what should be there by default, because an implementation by itself has no way to access the time zone; it has to come from outside, just like a locale. I don’t think we have any options right now that must come from an outside source. At least in JS, there’s been a big push to have things that come from outside sources more explicit. It was a mistake that `Intl.DateTimeFormat` can have a system time zone. In Temporal, when you use an external source, it’s explicit. I’m concerned about having options that rely on those external sources.

EAO: It sounds like we ought to take an action of ensuring the formatting part of the spec that talks about the formatting context, which currently refers to the current locale, explicitly lists the default time zone.

SFC: At the very least, it should come from the same place as the current locale. So if we have a mechanism for this, use it for the system time zone.

EAO: Maybe we don’t want to call it “system” because the time zone presented to MF might be different from the user’s understanding of what the system time zone is. Maybe “default” or “auto”?

MIH: ICU went that direction at some point. I don’t think it got much traction, but there’s a class called `GlobalizationPreferences`, which bundles together a lot of what you can have as preferences. Not saying we should take all of this, but that direction with a context kind of thing where you store things you might want as a user, exists currently as an idea. Android goes beyond that; in the context they also have the grammatical gender of the current user. 

EAO: We need to be careful with fingerprintability.

MIH: In Android you don’t have to specify it. 

EAO: It’s still a bit of information that I do not believe we ought to be placing in the things we require to be accessible by default.

MIH: Not arguing for that, but we should be flexible and say “put these things and more if you feel like it”

EAO: That’s exactly what we have about the formatting context at the moment.

EAO: One question, SFC: if ICU4X does not support date/time conversions, will it be possible to use it as a backing implementation for `Intl.DateTimeFormat`?

SFC: We’ve discussed this extensively with Henry. Need another library to do it, like temporal\_rs. There are others. Rather than ICU4X trying to do it yet again, our decision as a TC was to defer it to one of the existing implementations.

EAO: Sounds good. It does also kind of sound, then, that everything that is a MUST and almost everything that is a SHOULD will be directly implementable in ICU4X, but it will be possible to extend MF in Rust with specific libraries.

SFC: Yes, could export a trait that can be implemented with any third-party library you want. Not ideal, because I would prefer it if we could implement 100% of the MUSTs and SHOULDs with ICU4X.

EAO: Noting that as currently envisioned, this option will land as draft. Given that it’s part of the date/time functions and those are remaining as draft until the semantic skeletons data model is more than a tech preview in the LDML.

### #1083 (date/time)

EAO: This is the PR that’s closest to possibly landing. Sorry, SFC, I have not had time to look at your last reply there. The other restrictions on hour12 and calendar requiring literal values seem reasonable. The hour12 part is in order to be able to, in a message, actually select 12 or 24-hour formatting for presentation. You asked why we would want to use hour12 instead of relying on `u:hz`; that is not a value that’s customizable per-expression.

SFC: What I meant is that the two options are different, but the number of people who understand the nuances of why those two options are different, I can probably count on one hand. Those options are so close to each other, and if we’re trying to make a cleaner solution here, we should lean on trying to figure out a single option for this. If we were in a clean room, the way to do this would be that there are six options for hourCycle. A lot of people come to hourCycle – we have a lot of evidence that they want to use 24-hour time and they use `h24`, which is wrong. It’s not a great design choice to have two different options that overlap so much; discoverability will be a problem. I think it’s better to have just one option.

EAO: I agree and that’s why we’re proposing only one option for MessageFormat, which is `hour12`. We do not have `hourCycle` as an option for date/time formatting.

SFC: It’s still part of the locale

EAO: Yes, which as we just discussed, is defined outside of MessageFormat

MIH: How would `hour12` work?

EAO: As a boolean

SFC: Really a third choice, because it can be undefined. Would rather have an enum than a boolean.

EAO: I think that’s what we end up with, because we do not have non-string values. In the text, it’s true, false, or missing, which is the “auto” option. And this is following effectively what JS is doing with this option. We don’t need the “auto”, at least for now, because if we are enforcing this to have a literal value, the option not being in the message is the valid third possibility.

MIH: I don’t like `hour12` with a boolean. I know the boolean is not boolean, but even then, it’s icky; saying “boolean, but we can add later.” Then it’s not a boolean anymore.

SFC: If the way to get 24-hour time is to do `hour12=false`, that’s not the most discoverable thing. If you have an enumeration, you also have the benefit of documentation.

MIH: And why call it `hour12`, not `hour24`

EAO: Because that’s what JS calls it.

EAO: Two things: this option is outside the PR in question, it’s in the date/time override options, which this PR doesn’t touch. Second, it would be great to get a PR from MIH and/or SFC proposing a different option. Given that, is this PR in a state where we can land it? As discussed last week, it’s continuing to be “Draft” for all of this. It explicitly mentions that it will be expanded in the future, because it’s not a full set of functionality. The timeZoneStyle option is reduced to having two values, long and short. All the override options are required to be literals. Also, the `hour12` and `calendar` options should be required to be literals.

EAO: One question that came to my mind with the shapes of options at the moment is that there’s currently a `dateLength` field that only modifies the length of the month presentation, with some changes to the year at the outer edges.

MIH: Isn’t day-of-week part of the date? Is that affected?

EAO: Yes, it maps to that as well. I had not considered that when looking at what you get when you support the minimum for style options. The current shape of things does allow doing something like having year/month/day/weekday and to format that overall as something short, which is not possible with just a dateStyle.

MIH: In the current predefined styles, the short/medium/long/full, I think the short and medium don’t include the day of the week, but the others do. 

EAO: It’s only dateStyle=full which includes the weekday. Then there were a couple of locales that sometimes include the era with the year. 

EAO: So can we land this PR?

MIH: I would want to read it again

EAO: I would be happy to take from this an optimistic intent for us to be able to land this PR next week. Because of the discussion we just had about `hour12`, rather than modifying the override options at all in this PR, I’m going to file an issue noting that we discuss these and resolve these. I would prefer it not to scope-creep for this PR, but rather solve it as a separate step.

