# 2 June 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- Richard Gibson (RCH)  

**Scribe:** RGN  

## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

Nothing

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1076 | Make expErrors use an array (and only an array) | Discuss, Merge |
| \#1068 | Design document for percent formatting | Merge |
| \#1067 | Semantic skeletons design | Discuss |
| \#1065 | Draft new charter and goals for v49/v50 and beyond | Discuss, Agenda+ |

### PR \#1076 Make expErrors use an array (and only an array)

MIH: \`expErrors\` is required in at least some places, requiring explicit \`"expErrors": \[\]\`.

EAO: Some test cases are required to produce multiple errors, which should be filled out.

MIH: I’ll give it my best shot, but would appreciate help.

### Charter balloting \#1065, \#1074, \#1075

APP: I wish we had more votes; should we give it another week?

EAO: I’d prefer running with this and reacting if there are any complaints.

\<no objections\>

APP: All right, I’ll close the issues and submit our charter.

### \#1068 Percent formatting

APP: Where we left off, the plans were to not add \`:percent\` but to allow and discourage \`:unit unit=percent\`

EAO: I would prefer not to allow \`style=percent\` on integer, which could be confusing

EAO: e.g., would rounding happen before or after multiplication by 100?

APP: I think the reason for \`:integer\` might support this convenience…

EAO: Sure, but e.g. JS Intl.NumberFormat defaults fractional digits to zero for percent formatting

APP: So our spec should be explicit about the same behavior?

EAO: I would be \~happy\~ ok with that. But I would prefer we not follow such minor mistakes.

APP: Would you prefer \`:percent\`?

EAO: I would prefer \`:unit unit=percent\`, but \`:number style=percent\` seems fine because it follows JS.

APP: Are we approaching some kind of mental model around options?

EAO: I think we’re still at “when we feel like it”.

APP: Opinions from others?

APP: Putting it on \`:number\` allows us to not require \`:unit\`.

APP: Since we’re adding back \`:number style=…\`, what about engineering/scientific/etc.

EAO: Intl.NumberFormat puts those on \`notation\`, in part to allow setting both.

APP: I’ll clean up the PR.

### PR \#1067 semantic skeletons

APP: Since SFC is absent, I’m thinking this stays on the shelf.

MIH: I have a concern about field widths for individual fields.

EAO: Are you ok handing that discussion in the context of ICU4X?

APP: The design makes that a requirement. Classical skeletons solve this by count of letters, but the design here is to split it out by precisions.

EAO: I prefer the field width questions to be decided in ICU4X, upon which MessageFormat depends. It is not for this group to define.

APP: Presumably this would be in the semantic skeletons spec, which is part of CLDR.

EAO: Sure, just whatever upstream spec we reference.

EAO: I would be fine with us following the same solution as ICU4X, which I think is initially not supporting widths but adding them in later.

APP: I’m with MIH; that would be an unacceptable gap.

EAO: If we’re blocked, I don’t think resolution will come before the next CLDR release.

APP: If they’ve decided, then we could put it in our spec as immature.

EAO: In that case, I would prefer us to come out early with minimal functionality.

APP: It is certainly embarrassing that we don’t have a way to format dates and times.

MIH: I think option bags are fine. Semantic skeletons only solve for ICU wanting to slice data in certain ways. I don’t think I’ve seen anyone complaining about garbage in/garbage out w.r.t. explicitly specifying nonsensical field combinations.

EAO: So the question is: do we want to wait for all of this to settle before providing \*any\* date and time formatting, or instead introduce minimal support to be expanded later.

APP: I think we should define what functions exist, to help implementers. I would like to communicate a model. The problem with option bags of today (which are currently marked as draft) is the “deprecated at birth” problem.

APP: I have a personal preference for skeletons. Classical skeletons made me very happy, although these are not quite so good.

EAO: My preference, to unblock us, would be adding to the spec as required in release 48: \`:date style=…\`, \`:time style=…\`, and \`:datetime dateStyle=… timeStyle=…\`. I consider enduring support for those to be highly likely, and solving 60% to 80% of use cases—well, maybe 50%.

APP: That would solve the problem of MessageFormat having nothing at all.

RGN: I agree with EAO, it seems very unlike that the final shape would not include something like that, so it might as well include exactly that to get initial support in place.

MIH: The draft option bags we have now match ICU and JS, so it would be rude to take them away.

EAO: This really seems like a conversation to be had in ICU4X. What \*we\* can address is what I just proposed.

MIH: I don’t oppose that. I would oppose semantic skeletons as they are now.

EAO: Sure.

EAO: I think I should open/revisit a PR for {style,dateStyle,timeStyle} options.

MIH: The draft functions are available now in my implementation.

TIM: There are warnings in ICU documentation, but nothing at runtime.

EAO: I would prefer use of those functions to require an explicit signal, such as an “experimental=true” input. If that’s not the case, I would very much prefer removing them entirely.

MIH: That’s exactly what I oppose. People need them. But I could namespace them.

EAO: It would be really nice if they were namespaced.

APP: They are likely to be removed when we introduce semantic skeletons.

MIH: Will ECMAScript remove option bags?

EAO: No, but that’s completely different.

---

### Mihai’s example on why we need plural selection on `:currency`

English  
    I received the 1 dollar you sent me.  
    I received the 5 dollars you sent me.

Romanian:  
    Am primit dolarul pe care mi l\-ai trimis.  
    Am primit cei 5 dolari pe care mi i\-ai trimis  
    Am primit cei 23 de dolari pe care mi i\-ai trimis

Markdown friendly:  
Am primit \<span style="color:red"\>cei\</span\> 5 dolari pe care mi \<span style="color:red"\>i\</span\>-ai trimis  
Am primit dolar\<span style="color:red"\>ul\</span\> pe care mi \<span style="color:red"\>l\</span\>-ai trimis.

I cannot think of any way to translate using some kind of “1 dolar” form of the message (with a number).  
So it is technically an exact match (1 in MF2 or \=1 in MF1, not a `` `one` ``)  
But it is still a plural selection.

“1 dolar” / “5 dolari” / “23 de dolari” can be handled by formatter, no plural selection needed, “dolarul” cannot be.

It might be hard to see the “narrow” character difference, it is L-AI (singular) vs I-AI (plural).

---

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 27 open (was 26 last time).

* 17 are tagged for 48  
* 3 are tagged “Future”  
* 10 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 2 are tagged Feedback  
* 2 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 4 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion (see below)  
* 2 are `PR-Needed` and need a pull request  
* 1 is a ballot (\!\!)

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#866 | CLDR semantic datetime skeleton spec is nearly ready and MF2 should use it | Discuss |
| \#978 | Interoperability concerns and normative-optional features | Discuss |
| \#1051 | Plans for v48 | Close? |
| \#1074 | \[^BALLOT^\] Approve the new MFWG charter | Discuss |

