# 5 May 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)

**Scribe:** MIH  

## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

Discussion of:
[https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg](https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg) 

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1071 | Currency and unit conformance | Discuss |
| \#1070 | Allow clamping of digit size options | Discuss |
| \#1068 | Design document for percent formatting | Discuss |
| \#1067 | Semantic skeletons design | Discuss |
| \#1065 | Draft new charter and goals for v49/v50 and beyond | Discuss |

## Topic: Currency and Unit Conformance

*… and the related topic of option resolved value transitivity. This will be the primary focus of this call.*

## Topic: Digit size option clamping

*In the last call, MIH had an action to add text saying all bad options deliver up a Bad Option error. We still need to resolve the normative text about clamping.*

## Topic: Semantic Skeletons

*Let’s discuss next steps in completing the design.*

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1067](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1067)   

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 28 open (was 33 last time).

* 19 are tagged for 48  
* 3 are tagged “Future”  
* 13 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 1 is tagged Feedback  
* 0 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 3 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion (see below)  
* 0 are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#866 | CLDR semantic datetime skeleton spec is nearly ready and MF2 should use it | Discuss |
| \#978 | Interoperability concerns and normative-optional features | Discuss |
| \#1051 | Plans for v48 | Discuss |

## ACTION ITEMS:

TIM: wording for behavior when clamping (change the option for the next function in chain)

MIH: wording about all functions reporting the same error for invalid options (“Bad Option”)

## Infoshare

APP: EAO & MED exchanged messages about the resource format

EAO: I did send an email about one month ago to CLDR TC asking about feedback  
Do we have news?

MED: talked with the ICU and CLDR teams, and the concern is that most teams already have ways to store messages. So we might end up like xkcd with a \+1 standard.

EAO: how can I participate in this discussion?

MED: I suggest a doc, with reasons for this, and odds that the whole industry would adopt it

EAO: is the README not enough?  
[https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg](https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg)

MED: Maybe people didn’t see it. I’ve read it, not sure if that was the latest version.

EAO: I don’t know if it is the right place to talk about it here.  
This tries to replace the \`.po\` files, which is not a standard, and it is quite old.  
There are alternatives, but no standard / spec for something like resource format, doing what we are trying to do with mf2

MED: you set out to say what do we do, and why are no other standards  
What is not covered are prospects for adoption.

EAO: to some extent, yes. But if you start with tooling … we should not only have a syntax, but also a data model. So that it can be represented and used.

APP: I will timebox  
I suspect that we should not play telephone with the TC

MED: there is a meeting today, but will not cover this.  
Are there any players interested by this?

EAO: html  
Localization into html and DOM (for the web) requires something like a resource format.  
There is interest looking into a format like this.  
None of the existing things really works?

MED: what about WG? (W2C?)

EAO: I presented, but I didn’t get far, because it depends on a resource format.  
And under Unicode it didn’t move much.  
I think this should happen close to the MF2 work.

APP: it could be unicode, but can also be W3C.

MED: can also be done by an ad-hoc group under this WG.  
Then sell it, as solving a certain set of problems.

MED: I think it needs a bit more of a sale pitch

MED: how many people would be interested to join such a WG or sub-group.

EAO: I don’t have a feel about this

MED: we can advertise it. That there is a sub-group under MF2, and would like you to join.  
Give examples on what it looks like.  
We can have a message from APP, as chair.

EAO: so you propose to add work on a resource format to the scope of WG?

APP: an incubator group

MED: right. When exploring it should not be too formal.

MED: sketch a comparison on what can you do now, and what it can be enabled by a new format  
A bit more flesh on the document.

EAO: can we mode this document from under my account to a Unicode place

MED: we can move under MF2 under [Unicode.org](http://Unicode.org)

EAO: who do I talk to?

APP: talk to me. There is some chicken and egg

---

## PR reviews

### 1070 Allow clamping of digit size options

MED: we have programming languages that have exceptions.  
So a particular function might throw an exception that is a subtype of that exception.  
Programmers might want to have more info about the exact error

APP: this is already a sub-error of a “function error”  
I think \`errors.md\` already has that info.

APP: the question was what happens “after my function”. Is the output set of options modified?  
This is permission to actually change the value of the option.

MED: I continue to not understand that.

APP: if you clamp the value, you need to know what the new value is

MED: but it should also be able to find out the original value? For chaining?

MED: I’m ok to land it, but there is still a problem because the next caller can’t see the original value?

MIH: I’m not sure what the value is of that. The previous caller did something with the value. Why would I care what the original value?

MED: I might not be pinned.

MIH: The value I see might not have the original value. When I get the result from the function call, don’t know what the input was. If I need something like that, after chaining, get the original input and pass it to the second function (the one we chain to)

EAO: what is the benefit to translators?  
We have the capability to pass a local value to be passed not only as operand, but also as an option.  
The input of the first function can be the value of an option in the second function.

MED: how much power you give to the “message composer” vs the individual functions.  
I don’t identify the message writer with the translators.  
There will be restrictions on what translators can do vs the original message writer.

EAO: but a translator should be able to look at the message and understand what’s going on.  
For example in the \`:datetime\` family. When a translator looks at the syntax of the message, how can they get the most accurate understanding of what happens?  
I would minimize magic at the cost of making things more explicit / visible.

APP: So the resolved value should not be modified?

EAO: a function working with the resolved option of an input is a bit weird, but having a function access the input is more magic than we ought to have.

APP: briefly, should we table this change? Or add a 

MED: I think it is an issue of core spec.  
And if translators need to look at the syntax of the message, we probably failed. Unless they are really technical people, which can happen in some open source projects.

MED: I say that functions should have access to the original values, and the clamped values.  
Both, not just one.

MIH: if i chain several functions, now should be last function be able to access all the values \+ options that were accumulated in the chain?

MED: every time you throw away info, i think it is a problem. I will write a doc.

APP: I will not submit \#1070 today.

### 1068 Design document for percent formatting

APP: I have some approvals, comments from EAO

EAO: we can land this as is without a proposed solution. And I don’t think that the solution matches what the text around it says we want.  
Make it clear it is a discussion in progress.  
If we land it as “this is the solution” then my objections remain.

APP: do you have a preferred design?

EAO: have it under \`:unit\` and scaling under \`:unit\`, or \`:math\`

MED: list the alternatives, and compare

APP: we have the alternatives already, if one is missing we should add

APP: I will keep it another week. And I will barry the proposed design section.

### 1067 Semantic skeletons design  
   
APP: good progress, we have more flesh on it.

EAO: do I recall correctly that there is a discussion in icu4x (?) about adding width control on individual fields?

SFC: there is a proposal / issue, but didn’t move

APP: the req is that we need a way to influence individual fields.

EAO: we can’t define a field set until the semantic skeletons spec is finalized

SFC: two things here  
We need to align on the scope we need here.  
The comments I’ve heard show some misunderstanding on how widths are supposed to work.  
The day of week and month name are the only fields that matter.  
CLDR / ICU4X moved forward without this option.  
How critical is it?

APP: let me reiterate.  
The point for design documents is to collect requirements, and prioritize things, among others.  
I would like to have the best uses and requirements collected.  
If we drop something because we thing.

MIH: a library should only forbid me from doing things that are bad practice for the specialty of the library.  
A security library can prevent me from doing bad security stuff. And i18n library can prevent me from doing bad i18n things. But it should not prevent me from doing something that I want to do unless it is clearly incorrect i18n.

APP: we want a datetime functionality that is clear for people. We want semantic skeletons because it is the right direction. But it should resolve the requirements.

MED: I see it slightly differently.  
How do we encompass the syntax for dates?  
We can use semantic skeletons, which give decent options (no year \+ hour).  
Reality is that people don’t use the crazy options.  
Or we can use traditional skeletons.

