# 3 February 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

## Attendees

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Simon Clark \- Oracle (SCA)  
- Mihai Nita \- Google (MIH)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJS Foundation (RGN)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)  
- Elango Cheran \- Google (ECH)

**Scribe:** MIH 
**Previous Scribe:** MRR


## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#996 | Add missing “literal” specifier for key equality | Discuss |
| \#991 | Drop selection from :currency and :unit | Discuss |
| \#990 | Allow name-char as first character of unquoted | Discuss |
| \#989 | Simplify syntax character definitions | Discuss |
| \#988 | Add :percent | Discuss |
| \#983 | Drop reference to “registry” | Discuss, Merge |
| \#923 | Test schema ‘src’ property | Discuss |

## Topic: Handling the \`\*\` key vs. literal key value \`\*\` (\#996)

*Mihai raised the issue that the fallback key is not distinct from its literal representation. Eemeli created a PR to address it. Conversation has ensued.*

## Topic: Unquoted Literal Syntax (\#[724](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/724))

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 36 open (was 35 last time).

* 21 are tagged for 47  
* 3 are tagged “Seek-Feedback-in-Preview”  
* 6 are tagged “Future”  
* 14 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 1 is `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 3 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion.  
* 0 are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| [935](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/935) | Well-formed vs. valid (particularly [https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/935\#issuecomment-2529306693](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/935#issuecomment-2529306693))  | Discuss |
| [724](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/724) | Message Format Unquoted Literals | Discuss |
| \#865 | TC39-TG5 user study | Discuss |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

Info share:  
MED: ICU can’t promote the APIs for MF2 to draft until the API review is done; that restricts CLDR’s goal of promoting the spec (part 9\) to stable. Following up to see if we an be creative about the dates.

##  Test schema: allow src property to either be a string or array of strings \#923

APP: No progress

##  Drop references to a "function registry" \#983

APP: Also no progress, and Eemeli is not here  
Can use some attention from others, we want to drop the word registry, but we should address the terminology problem

##  Add :percent [\#988](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/988)

APP: a percent function would scale or not?  
Is 5 500% or 5%?  
Shane and Eemeli both missing in order to resolve.  
Several proposals about how to handle it. Keep it on :number, make a new function, do both.

MED: whatever we do, we should be able to specify the scale (5% vs 500%) so that the dev should not change the code.

MED: we can also add something to `` `:math` ``

SFC: One option is that we have \`:percent\`. Another option is \`:unit unit=percent\`. Because we should try to be similar to current ICU MessageFormat, we must have the scaling option here because MessageFormat did scaling when formatting as a percent. We could have an option called multiplier, which MED, but I think this is too open for the given use case. Another option is having an option called something like “scale” or “exp” that scales the number by a power of 10, whose exponent is provided. My preferred option is to automatically scale the input number according to the unit. For a unitless number provided to percent, the number would be scaled by 10^-2.

APP: Would you like to write a design document? Or I can put one up, and have you review it.

SFC: The latter option sounds good. Or we could talk ourselves into a solution. There are 2 paths: we have either \`:percent\` or we have \`:unit\` with some unit. Pros and cons of \`:percent\`: we can have something clean and out the door quickly, but then we have function bloat and duplicate number formatting options. Using \`:unit\` will always work no matter what we do, but the con is that ICU4X doesn’t have unit formatting completed yet.

APP: Theres no disagreement about what the options are. We just need to commit them to a design document and ballot it.

SFC: Aren’t teh major disagreements with just me and MED?

APP: No, EAO also has strong opinions.

## Simplify syntax character definitions, dropping content-char \#989

APP: I propose we hold onto that. Tied to quoted literals

## Allow name-char as first character of unquoted-literal \#990

APP: MED had some homework to do on that.

APP: Are we in a position to move on with the discussion of unquoted

MED: I think so

APP: can we do that now?

MED: sure

APP: when we made out namespace we ended up choosing xml NCNAME as name of that.  
So unquoted literals follow that, so that parsers can recognize tokes easier,  
But we resolved a few characters.  
MED propose to expand the unquoted to allow more strings without quotes around them.

MED: sharing screen:  
NCHAR (?) is really weird  
Some numbers, but not all.  
Many symbols, not all, some punctuation, not all.

APP: probably the state of Unicode when XML was written.

MED: it is a hodge-podge

APP: probably great for Unicode 3

MED: we can maybe regularize it cleanly if we adopt this: take whatever ASCII we want to allow, throw away all control characters, decide unpaired characters, throw away reserved characters.

MED: most of them are the characters at the end.  
Would clean it up. And better than name characters.

APP: we don’t want spaces. What about bidi?  
We allow them for syntactical reason outside the quotes.

MED: if they have syntactic meaning…

APP: they don’t have “meaning”, only for rendering

MED: yes, but they would provoke collision

APP: others? WDYT?

RGN: we need to express some “theory” for them, whatever we decide.

MIH: this would be `` `foo=3-value` `` with the proposed set, and the `` `|3-value|` `` would be a string literal, which is not intuitive. Same, `` `foo=-value` `` is confusing.

APP: `foo=3-$a`

MED: probably the minus is an issue.

MED: I think `` `value÷3` `` is valid currently (would have to check)

APP: if we change this, you propose we also change name to match it?

MED: I didn’t focus on that, but we can do the same thing for name

APP: as a maintainer would be nice to have a single “parsing class”

MED: true

APP: what we don’t want to touch is the naming recommendation in the UTR.

MED: 2 ways to approach this  
We can put all of these into a literal, but you should not make literals that are confusable. With a big range.

APP: you can put almost anything in quoted literals.

MED: signals it can be special, but there are similar kind of things.

APP: the unquoted are an affordance for people to not be forced to type `` `|` ``

NOTE: Shane and Elango joined

MED: we can say that literals and names can have a wide range of characters allowed, but some can be confusing, should be avoided, maybe linted above.

RGN: we had an explicit decision to exclude numbers  
We can revisit, but that was a decision in the past.  
Numbers are one of the of 

MIH: Shouldn’t we just put pipes everywhere? We still treat numbers as strings when we pass them to functions, or match in `select` statements.

MED: The big argument for dropping pipes are for keys and enum values.

MIH: But technically we don’t have enums. We just have strings.

MED: but I think that’s a flaw  
The functions can specify list of valid options, enum-like

APP: what we need is a proposal and a way to close this.  
With a possibility that we can change unquoted literals and name to a more permissive set, or reject it.

MED: let me take a shot at unifying this unquoted literals decision with names

##  Drop selection from `` `:currency` `` and \``` :unit` `` \#991

APP: has approvals, and we can always add them back

MED: I’m not against, we can always add them back when we have a use case.

MED: the decision usually affects other parts of the sentence, for agreement  
I don’t know of use cases right now, so we can remove them.

APP: I’ll squash and merge

##  Add missing "literal" specifier for key equality \#996

APP: comments in PR. RGN already approved.

MED: no need to disallow `` `|*|` ``, in keys with different meaning for quoted and unquoted.  
I think that we only need to alert people.

APP: if you have a string with a `` `*` `` in it you can quote it. Especially in a key.

MED: We just need a bit of caution for people.

MED: Suggested addition:   
\> The key value \* is special. The quoted literal |\*| is distinct from the fallback value \*, even though the character sequence represented it identical.

Disagree with “Note that this is only time a quoted and unquoted literal are treated as distinct.”

APP: more editing of the text

##  Well-formed vs valid \#935

APP: what’s the status of “well formed” vs “valid” (?)

The ability of functions to say “all the future valid options for this thing will be … some kind of limitations.

APP: the function can do almost anything.  
What is the MF2 “processor” going to do about it.

We can ask the function: “here is a map of options / value”, and the function can respond what is valid and what is not.

MED: I am not arguing for the MF2 processor for this, but for functions.  
Different error for “ill-formed” meaning will bever be valid in the future.  
Vs incorrect value, which is “right now”

MIH: a machine readable description of the functions can alleviate a lot of these problems.  
For tooling: localization tools, linters, editors.

APP: yes, but can we enrich the error codes we return now?

APP: so the proposal is to split bad-option / invalid-option?

MED: is it more about “what will we do in the future?”  
Different levels of functions errors.  
You don’t need to worry about the future, vs you do.

MED: the other thing that would help is: are these options able to take an enum (a limited set of options), or unlimited.

APP: we can have the MF2 processor validate for the standard functions.

MIH: there are still things that we only detect at runtime, because options can take a reference (`` `maxDigits=$foo` ``)

APP:  
\> A ***Message Function Error*** is any error that occurs when calling a *function handler* or which depends on validation associated with a specific function.

MED: we can forestall this until we get to a machine readable format. As in, not in this release.  
If we have machine readable data and a mechanism for the framework to query functions at lint time we can offer more guidance.

MIH: we have to assume that most tools will not be able to call functions, especially custom functions.  
A C\# localization too running on a desktop cannot call a custom function written in Kotlin for Android.

##  Other topics

MED: implementations in ICU cannot track the spec unless it is “frozen” early enough.

MED: we don’t want to freeze the CLDR spec until we have implementations.  
We will discuss it with Markus.  
Maybe freeze everything except MF2?

\---

APP: SFC, we postponed some items, but Eemeli is not here.  
Do you have something you want to discuss?

APP: percent

APP: can you state your position on the various options?

SFC:  
1\. Have `` `:percent` ``  
2\. `` `:unit` `` with `` `unit=percent` ``  
3\. use `` `:number` ``

We also MUST have a scaling option, with open-ended multiplier (MED), or allowed-list.  
SFC: I would go with a scale that is powers of 10\.  
One that would work with :unit and :percent have some kind of “auto”, where it would scale to per-hundred or per-thousand, depending on what makes sense.

APP: I invite people to think about it, because we will need to make a decision soon, maybe ballot.

SFC: I can maybe add a comment on GitHub.

APP: like a mini design document.

APP: I’ll put together a design doc

SFC: `` `:percent` `` would be complete “out of the door”, as `` `:unit` `` is a big can of worms.

APP: we can ballot

MED: but we will need a long discussion before balloting.

\---

SFC: semantic skeletons

MED: if we are ever going to finish, we must lock up 47\.

