# 24 November 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)

**Scribe:** EAO  

## Updates from Implementers

TIM: Still waiting for review for ICU4C

## Finalize :percent

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1100](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1100)

EAO: Approved.

## Finalize :currency

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1101](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1101)

EAO: Approved.

## Drop u:locale

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1102](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1102)

EAO: Approved.

## Updates from TPAC

### Message Resources

[https://github.com/w3c/i18n-discuss/blob/gh-pages/explainers/message-resources.md](https://github.com/w3c/i18n-discuss/blob/gh-pages/explainers/message-resources.md)

EAO: The W3C i18n WG has picked up message resources for incubation.

### DOM Localization

[https://github.com/mozilla/explainers/blob/main/dom-localization.md](https://github.com/mozilla/explainers/blob/main/dom-localization.md)

EAO: Got quite strong support for starting work on bringing in localization to DOM/HTML.

## Default Attribute Definitions

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098)

EAO: For consideration when we have more participation: could leave this out of what we’re trying to do at MFWG, given how little participation we’ve had recently.
