# 6 October 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  

**Scribe:** MIH  

## Student work on MF2 at UiB

EAO: Had a meeting last week MBH worked with some students on a JS localization library.

## OASIS presentation: what’s new in XLIFF 2.2

MIH: Public, posed on some LinkeIn groups and other places. I will have a link here.

EAO: are you aware of any implementation of the plural-gender-select extension?

MIH: no. I would expect Okapi to add something.

## Updates from Implementers

MIH: ICU4J: out, code freeze, at LDML 48 level, passes all tests in the official message-format repo

MIH: ICU4C: code freeze, at LDML 47 level

SFC: ICU4X: Zibi has some time and planning to look at it over the next couple of months

EAO: The JS one is LDML 48 for a while now. I am considering making it 1.0

## Default Attribute Definitions

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/1098)

MIH: I had some comments this morning, but not final, it was a rush job. I will add more.

MIH: … lost a lot of the notes. I did some talking.

MIH: would be maybe a good idea to put its2 tags in some kind of namespace.

MIH: my main concern is “clogging” the message with all that information.  
Probably a better option is to have this outside the message. Either in the storage, or a big “meta info” block in the message (tbd how to do it compatible).

## The :offset selector

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1099](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1099)

EAO: can you file a PR adding the pre-calculated exact values?  
