# 24 March 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- Ujjwal Sharma \- Igalia (USA)  
- Mihai Nita \- Google (MIH)  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)



**Scribe:**  TIM  


## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

EAO: New release of the JS implementation. Now out on npm and this release should be a complete implementation of the LDML 47 spec version. Still continues to be a polyfill for `Intl.MessageFormat` as well. Does go beyond that. Updated the MF1-\>MF2 cross-compiler capabilities. Updated the number skeleton and date/time skeleton parsers that I’d previously written, so now they support pretty much everything. The whole transform supports everything that I think is possible in MF2 without defining entirely new formatters to compete with the JS built-in ones. I did add a custom scale implementation, so that one works now with arbitrary values. Mostly because I needed it for the `percent` support. The documentation site for that is also updated. `messageformat.github.io` . Left out the `u:locale` stuff and the `:unit` usage, but otherwise everything that’s stable or draft in the spec is implemented.

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1060 | In tests, use “text” rather than “literal” as the type for formatted-parts text parts | Discuss |
| \#1059 | Add requirement and stability level to test schema | Discuss |
| \#1050 | Drop tests relying on u:locale | Discuss |

### PR \#1060

EAO: Nothing really drastic; I have not kept the design doc on formatted parts updated with changes, because that hasn’t seemed relevant enough. The `Intl.MessageFormat` spec needs a corresponding update.

USA: Feels more understandable from the perspective of a non-English speaker.

APP: landed PR

### PR \#1059

EAO: Everything we say that is optional or recommended or draft is separate from everything else. So it’s not like everything that’s recommended, if you do any of it you must do all of it. You can do any of the things separately. In terms of using the test suite, if we had `u:locale` and `:unit` usage tests, it would be useful if I could specify for my implementation with some identifier that these features are not enabled in the test suite, but everything else is. I’m not sure how to  – from an implementation developer point of view, I’m not sure how to make use of the proposed tagging.

MIH: I don’t see how that’s actionable when I write a test suite. These tests, I didn’t implement one attribute or five, what’s the difference for me? It means I’m not going to pass this test; something is optional and I didn’t do it. 

APP: Having some indicator of draft is useful because if you’re certifying that you meet a certain level… Having data about whether something is required or recommended or optional is interesting, if you fail one of the optional tests it may be because you didn’t implement it or it may be because you did it wrong. I can see EAO your point that the tests should have IDs. “I didn’t implement `u:locale`, so these seven tests don’t apply.” I don’t know if we want to get fancier than that, where we link tests to specific things in the spec.

MIH: You mentioned test IDs. That’s something I think would be very useful. When I write tests and you basically load the JSON and you have a list of 200 failures, and you loop through them; it would be nice to say in the failure “I failed test `foo-locale-ID-non-US`”; otherwise it’s difficult to track down.

EAO: I’m asking for a tag or a list of tags that can be attached to a test, and these tags would then be string identifiers for features of the spec. The only thing as an implementation developer that I think makes sense for a test are things that are optional or recommended or draft. That makes the test data easier to consume in a way I can say “skip all of the tests that have this tag”.

APP: So are we saying more work is needed to come up with the right schema?

MIH: I thought about something like that: `[ "@attr", ":fun" ]` . That means the attribute is optional and the function is optional. Because otherwise, we would have to update the whole spec with the IDs. This was you can say the function is optional and this attribute is optional. Something like that?

EAO: That looks like the list of tags that I was asking for.

MIH: Yes, that’s what I was trying to solve.

APP: Do we want to write a little design doc, or take a stab at revising the PR?

EAO: The current PR – did this come from a previous meeting that I missed? I’m willing to pivot the `u:locale` test removal PR to instead add this sort of list of tags and then to apply it to the `u:locale` as an example for how I think it ought to go. And then keep the `u:locale` tests in.

APP: I think the work on \#1050, which is your PR, inspired MIH’s work on \#1059. Should we close \#1059 and wait for a revision of \#1050?

EAO: That works for me

MIH: Yes

### PR \#1058

APP: Start rebranding from MF2 to “the MessageFormat standard”. What do we do with the outward-facing documentation/web site/ How comfortable are we with starting to move to calling it “the MessageFormat standard”?

USA: Since the discussion we had last week, I’ve been moving whatever educational materials I’ve put out there to start calling it MessageFormat instead of 2.0. Outside of just the naming, we had a meeting with Steven Loomis from Unicode last week. The web site is not out there entirely; it has a URL but is not published by Unicode standards. I hope we can agree within this group that we should conserve as much of the web site’s design as possible.

EAO: Before getting more into talking about the web site, the name “MessageFormat” just by itself is somewhat overloaded. 2.0 is I think unique. So if there is interest in losing the 2.0, I think we should specify this as “the Unicode MessageFormat spec”. The 1.0 that we’ve referred to internally is referred to as an “ICU MessageFormat”. If we do want to drop the 2, we should add a Unicode” prefix.

APP: That’s sort of where our discussion went; looking at long-term nomenclature. I think those are the right things to say. I’ll reach out to Luca – we do have messageformat.unicode.org as a web site now, and it does have the Unicode logo at the top. There are pull requests taking place and so on. This working group will maintain the content. To Ujjwal’s comment, the goal will not be to reduce the effectiveness of it in any way. I don’t want to create a barrier to entry for getting people to contribute to it. 

USA: Moving documentation to ICU4C/ICU4J… redundancy can be bad, but maybe some duplication is OK in this case so the documentation site can be one-stop shopping.

EAO: As I’ve just pushed out the messageformat.github.io site… I would very much prefer to leave out from that site all references to documenting “how does the MessageFormat 2 syntax work?” and would prefer to refer to it elsewhere. That will continue to be the messageformat.unicode.org site, right? Since the JS implementation is an OpenJSF project, it makes sense for its docs to be hosted separately from the Unicode spec site. 

USA: I just saw the updated web site; it looks great, thanks Eemeli. The older API reference is up – is that a caching thing on my end?

EAO: Yes, I got all of that done in the last few hours and haven’t had time to take down and add redirects from the old places to new places.

USA: We also have on the Unicode web site a tiny stub on how to set up JS, and then we link to your API reference.

EAO: I might write some migration guides for MF1 and Fluent, with the transforms now available. Might end up needing to write a command-line tool or something for transforming MF1 content into MF2 content. Seems like a tool that could be useful for someone.

USA: Not super deep, but we’re also using the “export to XLIFF” path of your library. I don’t yet see any docs for that, would you – is that on your todo list, do you need any help?

EAO: I had no idea anyone was using that. Intended to become a thing, intended for us here to have a clearer discussion about whether we’ll do anything about that. I have an action item to look more at the XLIFF extension that’s in 2.2 that Mihai has written.  
. A s

## Topic: Rechartering and Goals (\#1051)

*We need to set goals for the working group since we’ve partly or wholly disposed of the ones we had.*  
[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1051](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1051)

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md)

## Topic: Semantic Date/Time Skeletons (\#866)

*[Shane Carr ሀ](mailto:shane@unicode.org) has requested that we consider the incorporation of semantic date/time skeletons into MF2’s date/time functions. Reserving time to discuss.*

SFC: Thanks for having me on the call. I’ll do a bit of a walkthrough so everyone is on the same page. You’re seeing UTS 35, section 4: Dates. If I go to the table of contents, I’ll see a section called “Semantic Skeletons.” We added this into UTS 35 in version 46\. \[Reading from the spec\] A semantic skeleton has a field set and options. Valid field sets make sense together. Single field for time. Can combine date fields in various ways. Different length options: long, medium, short. I’ve heard very loud and clear that we want a way to tailor lengths of specific fields. There is a ticket tracking this: “length hints”. Locale data selects which length actually makes sense. Algorithm for how you map a semantic skeleton onto an ICU skeleton. You don’t need a semantic skeleton API, can just use this algorithm. 

What this means for MessageFormat: currently what we have in the spec is classical skeletons. When I say “skeletons” I’m lumping that in with component specs. But classical skeletons and component specs are two ways of representing the same thing. The issue with having classical skeletons is that ICU4X does not implement them, by design. They allow the developer to specify things that don’t make sense, and are less efficient to implement as they require runtime parsing and processing to formulate your patterns. With semantic skeletons, you can pre-calculate the patterns listed in the table and you may just need to glue a time value. With classical skeletons, you have to run the date-time pattern generator, which is a slow/relatively inefficient piece of code. For MessageFormat, having to map classical skeletons to semantic skeletons would not be a great idea for users. If there’s a classical skeleton that’s not representable as a semantic skeleton, we would have to approximate. My argument is there’s less indirection going from semantic to classical than the other way around. Absent other constraints, semantic skeletons are a much more clear and robust version of skeletons that should be implemented in MessageFormat. One point that was raised was “semantic skeletons are not specified”, but now they are. There’s an implementation in ICU4X. I believe MessageFormat should use it in its `:date` function. 

APP: Thanks for bringing this forward. I think there is – we would like very much to have the right mechanisms in MessageFormat. I am pretty familiar with classical skeletons and the power and flexibility of those, and I’m a big supporter of the idea of skeletons in general. So I’m super curious to see how well this holds up as a programming paradigm. Part of me is cautious because I don’t see what the proposal would be for implementing this in MessageFormat. I haven’t used the ICU4X implementation so I don’t know how you actually do it, but I imagine you have enumerations you can use for skeletons. How would we express those into MessageFormat syntax in a way that users would understand?

EAO: Two things. So the first one: could we get a clarification internally on what we consider to be a skeleton? My understanding is that skeletons are strings that represent what’s supposed to be part of the formatting of a date/time or a number. Do I understand right, Shane, that your understanding of a skeleton is more of a data structure? You mentioned that ECMA-402 uses skeletons, but it’s got an options bag and not a string representation.

SFC: Good question; when I use the word “skeleton” I’m referring to the data model, the class of things that maps to specific fields that have specific lengths. Could be represented as a string, so I would use the term “string skeleton”; then there’s the options bag, and both map to “classical skeletons”, which is a data model. Semantic skeletons have a data model but don’t have a string syntax yet. In ICU4X, there’s an enumeration of the valid field sets and then you set your options. There could be a string syntax for this, I’ve sketched one in one of the CLDR issues. Looks like MessageFormat is moving more towards keeping things as options bags, so maybe we don’t need a string syntax, just a JSON form.

APP: We elected to go with options bags at some point in our history, vs. using picture strings. Picture strings are notoriously a problem because they have to be localized. Skeleton picture strings are helpful from the POV that a developer can, in a placeholder in MessageFormat, express what they’d like to have and let the datetime pattern generator get the right results. We went with option bags rather than picture strings at some point in our history 2-3 years ago. I’m a little concerned because I thought you were just going to have an enumeration. If there has to be “here’s a bag of options and I can find out later if it’s valid or not”, I don’t know how that ends up getting expressed in a placeholder in a way that developers can understand.

EAO: Second thing here is – I think it would be good, Shane, if you could clarify what you’re asking for in terms of the change to `:datetime`. Currently, that function provides two different ways of specifying formatting. One is the skeleton approach/options bag, very close to the ECMA-402 approach. The second approach is also from ECMA-402, and that is defining a `dateStyle` and a `timeStyle`, or just one, for formatting with just these two fields. Are you asking for semantic skeletons to be added as a third alternative “options bag” effectively, or are you asking for one or both of the previous currently specced options bags to be replaced with semantic skeletons?

SFC: To APP, how can we validate that these things are enumerations – *showing code*. Validity of field set is fully deterministic at compile time. No way to map a data-ful enum onto JSON. In order to map this into JSON, it’s unavoidable that we have some sort of data structure validation. We take the JSON and see “does this represent a valid FOO” in general, not just for skeletons. Pass the fields into the field set builder and ask “do these fields represent a valid field set?” Will return an error if not valid. I equate those two things as basically the same.

APP: But there’s a finite number of those. Very large, but finite

SFC: Not as large as you might think, but yes, there’s a finite number. In principle, it could be one very big enumeration. One issue here is that you don’t want to be able to specify an option for a field set that doesn’t use it. This is potentially surprising in ways we don’t want to expose. The way to make this fully type-safe is to inline the options into the enumeration. it still requires validating “is this enumeration a valid field set?”, so I’m proposing we have a way to encode it in JSON.

SFC: EAO, can you repeat your question?

EAO: Are you asking for semantic skeletons to be introduced as a third way to specify formatting, or for one of the existing ones to be removed?

SFC: ICU4X does not and will not be supporting classical skeletons. Would be great if we weren’t forced to ship code that we see as being legacy-type code in ICU4X just because MessageFormat asks us to require it. My ideal situation would be that semantic skeletons would be the only way that MessageFormat specifies dates. Adding length formats is pretty easy to do, so I’m not too worried. Classical skeletons is the one I’m most worried about.

EAO: With length formats, do you mean the `dateStyle` and `timeStyle` options.

SFC: Yes; they’re easy to map onto semantic skeletons.

APP: What about field options?

SFC: Field options are what I’m calling classical skeletons and will not be compatible with the way that ICU has implemented this.

APP: So do you have a proposal for how to make it possible to do what field options are doing, or do we need to take field options and apply some additional requirements for them?

SFC: My concrete proposal would be to remove the field options and replace them with semantic skeleton options.

APP: But you don’t have a syntax for us to use, that I can see.

SFC: If I go to the MessageFormat spec for the `:datetime` function, you have all these field options. If I were to write this as a proposal, it would be to remove these ten options and replace them with 6 options (from the `FieldSetBuilder` struct in ICU4X). That would be my initial proposal.

USA: I just wanted to mention that there’s a trade-off here. I’m very sympathetic to your argument that there’s a certain pattern that works really well for ICU4X and it would be great if we stuck to that so ICU4X doesn’t have to ship anything that’s not really suitable. I think this can go multiple ways: for instance, ECMA 402 does things the way we are doing things right now, and ECMA 402 can’t unship anything or drastically change some things, it would be deeply jarring in that environment; some trade-off would have to be made here. 

EAO: So I started – the whole options bag started very much from an ECMA-402 point of view. It’s drifted since then; there’s stuff that is in ECMA-402 that we don’t support, and things spelled a little bit differently in a few places. We’ve already lost the ease of use of being able to say that these two things match or that ECMA-402 formatters are a valid superset and you can use them directly. From that point of view, and furthermore, as we already have 3 functions here, not just 1 – `:datetime`, `:date`, and `:time`. I’m open to exploring going in the direction Shane is pointing at, but what we end up with needs to be sufficiently different from looking at the ECMA-402 options. I think the current MessageFormat2 way of doing this would be to represent all of these eight as different functions, which would probably work pretty well. That’s what I had in mind.

APP: I am super sympathetic to skeletons; I understand that lots of implementations exist that use some flavor of picture string, option bag, classical skeleton, and we may want to provide a way for those to exist. I could see us doing this and making the world a better place. What we need is a design document so that we can debate the exact syntax. So I would be happy to help with that, Shane, or I’d be happy to see you create one if you have the time. 

SFC: To respond to USA, no matter what happens, there’s going to have to be mapping code that goes between semantic and classical; that’s lossless, going from classical to semantic is lossy. The things lost in the conversion are things that are questionable in validity anyway. This mapping code has to exist somewhere. I would hope to propose semantic skeletons for inclusion in ECMA-402 and it’s a proposal that wouldn’t be too terribly hard to make. Just resolving an issue that many delegates have observed and seen anyway. In the meantime, classical skeletons – you can map a semantic skeleton onto it to power your `Intl.DateTimeFormat`. And the mapping sits exactly where it should, in the layer between ECMA-402 and MessageFormat. Whereas if we have classical skeletons, which we all acknowledge are kind of broken in different ways, we’re forcing this into the MessageFormat implementation in a way that’s going to be hard to remove later. A compromise situation that no one has raised is having these be normative optional. I have distaste for that language, but if it’s normative optional and could eventually be deprecated, if the thing we’re concerned about is having this transition period, then we could consider that.

To respond to EAO, I would love to see `:date`/`:time`/`:datetime` – these all take different options and it would make the data model easier to validate. We’ve had concerns from Mark Davis among others about having too many functions. I don’t mind having a lot of functions, but multiple smaller functions that take the semantic options could result in a quite clean design.

The third question, from APP, was whether I would do the work – I’m happy to collaborate on this kind of thing, would probably like to work with one of the other people to put together a proposal. I’mn in a good position to be a code champion of a proposal, rather than person writing specification text. But we can figure that out out-of-band.

MIH: Shane mentioned that I have a few concerns about this spec as it is right now, and you’re saying that he’s working on it. To clarify for others what is missing: he mentioned you can map from semantic skeletons to classical losslessly. I don’t think that’s true; there’s no way to specify the length for different fields. I would have no way to say “abbreviated day of week, but full month.” I argue that that’s absolutely not invalid. That’s my main concern with the spec as it is right now.

APP: To respond to the idea of too many functions, we’re going to have lots of functions. I think we want to make as many functions as are needed to make things work well and be understandable by users, but not excessive functions so people are confused about which of the many things to use. I think we can explain eight functions with the right options. MIH’s argument is something that we’ll want to address. Shane, we’re not asking for spec necessarily, but a design doc in our space is something we can argue about without arguing over spec text, and I’d be happy to work with you on filling it out, but we want to see how it addresses all these different concerns. I think we have a window here to do this the right way and I can see how MessageFormat can use semantic skeletons as a way of expressing things. People don’t need to have access to this specific bag of options, they just want their pattern to format correctly. If they can get the same result as they would have by writing this bag of options as it is today, that’s fine. 

USA: Your statement just now is – I could change my mind drastically based on that. I wanted to highlight one thing about what Shane mentioned, which is that I understand fundamentally what the point is, options bags are technically just skeletons; however, there is a mindset different here. There’s a Rusty solution, which is more obvious in a Rusty environment, and there’s a JavaScript solution that is more natural in a JS context. There’s a mindset shift that needs to be communicated somehow to developers. Out of the realm of possibilities, the idea of codifying this in terms of the API itself is slightly easier to educate than codifying it in terms of enums or field sets, which are relatively alien concepts to the average JS developer.

EAO: I have no idea what the ECMA-402 API for this would be, but my first guess would be that it looks like – still using an `Intl.DateTimeFormat` and constructing it with not an options bag but an instance of a specific semantic skeleton string or something. In that context, I can see – in JS, we’ll never be able to get rid of the current contents of `Intl.DateTimeFormat`. I can see that API co-existing with the semantic skeleton API, but given that it’s not just one field, but one field and some options, I don’t think we even ought to consider this as something to implement in parallel with the current field set. Pick one or the other for a function to implement. Both will want to have `:datetime`. So I think this means we need to make a choice whether to do semantic skeletons or field sets. USA, to address your comments, it’s easy to implement something like `:js:datetime` that works like the current spec does. I don’t think departing further than we already have from the JS spec is necessarily a problem. In particular, the space of expressible skeletons is smaller with semantic skeletons than the current options.

APP: It makes sense to me for us to do away with the option bag altogether and provide a mechanism. Using `Intl.DateTimeFormat` under the covers… but we don’t need to depend on 402 moving for us to do this, unless they come up with a different result. Since we’re all the same people, we should talk to ourselves and do it right. But I like that we could help other implementations to get the right answer, like `gettext()` and other places that haven’t added skeletons.

USA: Just a quick note, I am relatively happy with the idea of a specific `:js:datetime`; the only concern I have is that users would have to pay for that with interop issues, so it would be harder to convince people to use it. But it would be a way to support both.

EAO: I didn’t mean that the `:js:datetime` should be baked into the `Intl.MessageFormat` spec. I meant it’s possible to write a wrapper around the `Intl` `DateTime` implementation to provide that.

APP: I guess there’s a couple things. We’re discussing removing the field set options from the draft `:datetime` option. The second thing is that we need to do design work on semantic skeletons so that we can make the spec for them. Is that what we’re saying? Is anyone opposed to that?

SFC: I’m not asking for consensus right now, but what are the concerns and some of the issues that need to be addressed? We’ve heard some of these voiced now, so I’m asking if it’s worth me investing more time in making a proposal. My conclusion is that it seems like this is a proposal that could be fruitful if we spend some more time on it.

EAO: Follow-on question: The semantic skeletons included “calendar period” and “zone” as stand-alone things. Presumably the latter is for just formatting a time zone name. What is “calendar period”?

SFC: A calendar period is for formatting the part of a date that’s not actually a date. Like a month or a year, or a week or an era by itself, without actually specifying the day. The reason that semantic skeletons make that distinction is that it’s not possible to format a calendar period with a time. That’s the reason that the distinction exists. Whether or not it makes its way into the JavaScripty version is something that could be discussed. Maybe the calendar period could be folded into the `:date` function.

EAO: Why is zone separate from calendar period?

SFC: Zone is for time zone formatting; it’s a different type of field. For stand-alone time zones, as you said,

APP: Which wouldn’t have to have any portion of a date or time.

SFC: That’s correct.

MIH: The other reason for the zone being a separate animal from the time is that the time zone potentially drags a lot of data with it. You can look at it at compile time and say “this doesn’t need anything from the time zone” and drop everything. If you sneak in a time zone, all of a sudden your data size explodes. Seems like an ICU4X concern.

EAO: If the stuff with zone as a suffix is separately that way for data size reasons in ICU4X, I think I would have a strong preference for folding each of those into whatever is their parent, and relying on the existence or nonexistence of an option like `zone` or `timeZone`. It would be slightly more difficult from a parsing point of view, but easier for users.

SFC: There’s two reasons we have them separate; one is the data size concern, which I would say isn’t only an ICU4X concern. The other reason is that it aligns with the Temporal data model as well as the data model in other languages, where a PlainDateTime and ZonedDateTime are different types. I think that’s a valuable distinction to make.

EAO: I have further questions, but they will probably be addressed and will make sense in the context of a design doc.

APP: I think we’re approaching what we can do in this context. Getting something down on paper and then exploring the different ways to package things. Shane, do you want to help with the design document? Do you want to start something or would you prefer if somebody started something and you added to it?

SFC: It sounds like, Addison, you’re happy to help with some of the processes here, so we can just follow up.

APP: I’ll ping you offline.

APP: I’ll point out that we want this to go in 48\. Six months is not as long as you think it is.

EAO: If we don’t make it into 48, we do have the fallback option of going to 48 with just style options; no field options and no semantic skeletons.

APP: I think we would want to indicate what direction we’re going. 

MIH: I think that is not an option from the ICU side. The strong push internally to push adoption for MessageFormat 2, and if there’s no way to map existing functionality to the new MessageFormat 2… we can map traditional skeletons to semantic skeletons, but if we say we don’t have anything like that, that’s not an option.

USA: I can second that not having the ability to format date/times aside from with a style option could have a negative impact on people using MessageFormat 2\.

APP: Let’s do what we can to make the dates…

EAO: I don’t know. When you go beyond the simple style options – if you’re able relatively ergonomically to pass in something like an options bag or formatted string as part of the operand, you end up with capabilities that are OK for your platform and I would bet it’s rare for a localizer to need to know exactly how the month name is formatted in this particular date field, compared to being able to tell that this is a date field that is being formatted in some way, and the option is on the developer’s side. We can get that with the current text and just the style option.

APP: It’s more complicated than that. MIH is right that you need some control over the specific fields. We can get there; if we have a direction mapped out, then I don’t see any barriers to us finishing.

MIH: Yes, it’s not about the localizer, everything in the developer side. It comes from UX, UX says this is how I want my dates, so I want that control. 

EAO: And I’m saying that this capability exists by baking in the options that you want for the formatting into the operand that you’re using, and not defining it at all on the MessageFormat 2 syntax. It’s moving something that was a part of the syntax in MF1 and sometimes a part of the syntax in Fluent to be something that you define in the code, in the wrapper option of the value you’re passing in to be formatted as a date. The capability is there, it’s just a different path than the one that is taken by ICU MessageFormat.

USA: To add to MIH’s point, I want to push back against the idea that it’s uncommon for folks to have different formatting for different parts. I think we might be underestimating how common it is to tailor certain fields.

APP: I think there’s wild agreement. People want to tailor which ones appear, especially for classical skeletons. You don’t want to mention the year, but you have one sitting there. Again, I think we’re at the point where we have a direction and if we write it down, it has the expressiveness to do what people want to do. One of the things I like about classical skeletons is you say how you want it to appear but you don’t say exactly how you want it to appear. Plenty of cases where people have classical picture strings and you’re dependent on locale data in ways you can’t see. Chinese is a common one – you don’t want it to switch to the ideographic representation of the month. No one should have to localize the skeleton; that’s the idea. Do we have a direction? 

