# 12 May 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- Richard Gibson (RCH)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)


**Scribe:** TIM  


## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1071 | Currency and unit conformance | Merge |
| \#1070 | Allow clamping of digit size options | Merge |
| \#1068 | Design document for percent formatting | Merge, Agenda+ |
| \#1067 | Semantic skeletons design | Promote from Draft PR, Discuss |
| \#1065 | Draft new charter and goals for v49/v50 and beyond | Discuss |

### \#1071 Currency and unit conformance

APP: No ship-its but I feel we’re close to done. Text just says currency codes are case-insensitive. Doesn’t go into how implementations deal with that. Just says currency codes are case-insensitive, meaning the values. The other thing, and I changed it this morning, is that previously it said the value of the operand’s unit SHOULD either be a string… and I changed it to say that valid values are either a string or an implementation-defined type. By changing it I took away the squidgy “should” and make it a definite statement. Values could be all kinds of things, but the only valid ones are these. Any thoughts?

### \#1070 Allow clamping of digit size options

APP: merge it? Merged

### \#1068 Design document for percent formatting

APP: Just incorporated a bunch of suggestions from EAO. Removed proposed design. Could be at a point where we commit the design doc. I propose that we do so today. The question is whether we’re at the point of agreeing on a design. 

EAO: One of the questions I raised earlier today is that as I was re-reading this, the only use case we present for scaling is that for effectively somebody writing a new MessageFormat 2 message, that they might want to not do the scaling in the code. Specifically what I’m saying here is that if we agree to these use cases, we are leaving out MF1 compatibility as a use case. And that this – we ought to do explicitly rather than implicitly. I want to raise this and if we agree the current text is fine, it’s fine, but if we accept that a valid use case is someone wanting to migrate MF1 code to MF2 without needing to add scaling to a percentile unit for formatting… I wanted to raise this point.

APP: Valid use case that it doesn’t say currently. We should say that as a use case, because it’s real. I don’t think it changes the requirements. I kind of say that in the background section, but we can call it out.

EAO: I think this is one of these places where we’re looking at deciding whether to do the thing that was done before, or do the thing that overall might be simpler. I think that use case ought to be listed if we think it’s valuable enough to explicitly include.

APP: I think it’s valid to add that. I will add that to the design doc. I won’t merge this as it is, since we need to make a change. While I’m making that change, is there a sense for – do people have a sense, let’s start with functions, do people have a sense for what functions they want? Do we want `:unit`, do we want `:number`/`:integer` with `style`, a dedicated function, or some combination?

EAO: I think `:unit` with `unit=percent` is the right thing to do. I noted that we’ll end up with this range of optionality with respect to unit formatting. Almost certainly – for example, the JS unit formatter is going to rely on `Intl.NumberFormat` and that only supports an explicitly listed subset of the units supported in CLDR and ICU. I presume ICU would not want to have the ICU MessageFormat implementation rely on only supporting the formats that happen to be included in the JS spec. Given this, I think it would actually make all of `:unit` a little less optional if we made the whole of `:unit` required but make the supported units optional.

MIH: If you want my preferred order, it would be an option on the number, then unit, then the last one a separate function. The reason for me is that this is just another way to show a number. tt doesn’t behave like a unit with long/medium/short abbreviated forms, usage, conversion from one unit to another, all kinds of fancy things that you have on units. Feels more like a number. A compact number format is what? 20 millions, is that like a unit? Where do we go from there? Feels like a number to me.

APP: I like your thinking about how we would start to handle `:unit`. Slowly over time extracting units into specific functions – I think that would be kind of dumb. If we don’t require the unit functions and make the unit optional, it would make it hard for implementations to handle every possible unit. Could combine the unit with something else, b/c it so happens that CLDR has percent and some other things. Could actually see us doing both. To be honest I’m not wild about `style=percent` because it’s one of only two that are left, and the other style is `scientific` or something, which is something very number-ish.

MIH: Scientific is one, compact is another, spellout is another.

APP: That’s MF1 

MIH: Should have a way to do that

APP: Should, but right now what we have is a specific thing. I’m not allergic to a `percent` function. 

MED: Style is fine, it’s a transformation of the number, but so is `scientific`. Scientific changes 100 to 1 times 10^2. Engineering would change it if we have `engineering`. And `compact`, and `spellout`. Just makes it needlessly complicated. I was never fond of breaking `integer` off into a separate function anyway, I think that was dumb. We can have each of these styles, duplicate on `number` and `integer`, and then be done.

EAO: At least in JS, `compact`, `scientific`, and `engineering` are on the `notation` option rather than a `style` option. Percent and decimal are the choices that in the JS API would end up on `style`. If we’re going down the `number` path, I would have a strong preference for sticking to the `Intl.NumberFormat` options. My preference order would be first to have it on `:unit`, secondarily to have it on `:number`, and I would prefer us not to have a custom `:percent`. I would be interested in hearing the story of if we were going to support per-mille later, how would that work from any of these steps?

APP: I was going to bring that up. We know CLDR has a per-mille, there’s a per-myriad somewhere. I think we need to think in terms of something maintainable over time. If our design is going to try to pack things into non-optional functions, does that generate any jeopardy or will it generate future-ly optional values for style, vs. maybe keeping all of that in the `:unit` function where we expect certain optionality to occur and we already have some shape to it? Maybe that’s a consideration. I’m being persuaded by the argument that I’d rather put it in `:unit`, but I have no objection to putting it into… \[inaudible\]

MED: I don’t care so much whether it’s on the `notation` option or the `style` option. The distinction is fuzzy. `scientific` scales, so does `engineering`. I don’t mind matching JS. Strongly against putting it on `:unit`; people don’t expect that. If it’s on `:unit` and doesn’t scale, which it shouldn’t, it’s just going to be weird. Simplest thing for users is to put it in `:number`.

MIH: I pasted a bunch of things:  
Intl.NumberFormat() constructor  
[https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global\_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat)  
style  
The formatting style to use.

"decimal" (default)  
For plain number formatting.

"currency"  
For currency formatting.

"percent"  
For percent formatting.

"unit"  
For unit formatting.

`NumberFormat` has a style and one of the values for the style is `percent`. I’m not sure what the argument was for not going there.

APP: I think we can bikeshed the option name and values when we actually modify the spec. I agree that we should try to be consistent with something, probably with the `Intl`, because we’ve been consistent with `Intl` elsewhere. Am I hearing that we are developing a consensus towards putting it on `:number` and `:integer`? Who would object?

EAO: First, I do not think it belongs on `:integer`. I think it ended up first on `:integer` because it was on `:number` and we copied `:integer` from `:number`. I think the use cases for percent formatting on `:number` where I presume we would be following the JS example and scaling it would mean you would end up – for example, if you wrote `50 :integer style=percent`, that would be formatted as `5000%`, right. You would only be able to use `:integer` for percent formatting of something ending in 00 for percent. This seems so rare that I would presume any use of percent formatting on `:integer` would be a mistake. MIH earlier, when I mentioned about the `` `NumberFormat` `` API, I was noting that the options are under style and notation… let’s you combine style and notation…

APP: I disagree slightly about `:integer`. `:integer` is a shorthand that lets you do `maximumFractionDigits=0` without having to type that every time. Does not require an integer operand, just that the formatting is integer-like. It’s a convenience function and is deliberately narrowed to integer formatting. I don’t necessarily regret it because I think a lot of people will use it with that in mind, without having to cast a number into an integer. I could also see wanting to have `:integer style=percent` – also a convenience because you don’t have to go through the whole “remove the fractional bits.”

MED: I think `:integer` was a mistake; a lot of mechanism for a very small value. That being said, I don’t care, so if we want to take anything off of `:integer`, fine by me, b/c I would recommend people never use it.

EAO: Also noting for example, Addison, could you clarify whether in your thinking, something like `0.1 :integer style=percent` – how would that format and if the value of that expression were used as an operand for another function, what would be the result value?

APP: I think the operand’s value would be 0.1 – that is, we don’t modify the operand value.

EAO: I think the `:integer` spec has the resolved value as always an integer.

APP: It might

MED: If so, that’s a mistake

APP: “The function `:integer` requires a number operand as its operand.” Doesn’t say it should always be an integer. Then there’s “resolved value” – implementation-defined integer value of the operand. Okay, so the resolved value might be an integer. I don’t know whether scaling is applied or not for `style=percent` because we haven’t written that yet. Is 0.1 supposed to be the number 10?

MIH: For the scaling, I think I would go with whatever JS does. I would do the same. If the MF1 is the opposite of that, then I think it would be good to have a scaling option, to be able to migrate for MF1 to 2\. For the default, I think it’s good to be like JS.

Good news: Intl.NumberFormat and ICU MF1 behave the same on scaling:  
format(0.12) \=\> "12%"

APP: Are we tending towards a consensus to use `:number` `style=percent`? Any objection to that? \[No objections\] The other thing is CLDR has a unit of `percent`, `permille`, `permyriad`, etc. We have a `unit` function we’re implementing. Do we end up with both, or carve out percent?

EAO: I would prefer not to conclude the discussion on exactly what to do with percent today. I would be OK with a provisional idea of doing it on `:number`. I think there’s a whole bunch of details that need to be worked up if it happens on `:number` that we haven’t addressed, like the resolved value shenanigans. I think carving out `percent` specifically from `:unit unit` would probably not really make sense, but if we’re doing this, then I would oppose adding scaling factors anywhere, because they are not necessary and a user would just need to know – if they need to do scaling, they use `:number`, and if they need to do not scaling, they use `:unit unit=percent`. This makes no sense, but is the current reality of JS and possibly the ICU number formatter as well. Given the use case for scaling is addressed, that makes sense. If the use case comes from matching what’s possible in MF1, we have to implement all of the things that are possible with the skeleton structure, which would mean general-purpose multiplication if I remember right. That, I don’t think we have anything like consensus for.

APP: My proposal is this. We currently have a design doc with no proposed design. I propose that we don’t have a lot of new info, we have one edit we agreed to regarding MF1 compatibility. I propose to add that and merge the design doc, then create a new PR based on today’s discussion, which we can then beat on for a couple weeks. I’ll build it in a way that has all the details. Does that sound like a good plan of action?

MED: I just want to point out that if you have unit conversion, then units can do scaling. I’m in favor of what Eemeli said – I think we need no scaling, no math. No scaling functions.

EAO: So moving on slightly to discuss what Mark just said about math, the primary reason why we do have `:math` is to provide a solution for the MF1 plural offset behavior, so that that becomes possible to do within a message. I would be fine with leaving `:math` completely out of it, but I don’t think it would be a good idea to add an `offset` option on `:number`/`:integer`. I think it would be quite confusing.

APP: Already had that argument. `:math` is draft, but…

MED: That’s a separate topic

APP: Is that our plan, then? I will make the edit we discussed earlier, merge the PR, and then I’ll make a new PR with the proposed design?

EAO: Recognizing that `:math` is a separate new topic, I think one decision we ought to make is whether we un-draft `:math` or remove `:math`. Mark, given that you’re on the call, I would be interested to hear whether you’d be OK with us removing `:math` and not adding plural offset support specifically anywhere.

MED: I wouldn’t be OK with that – not OK with removing the capability of converting MF1 to MF2.

APP: I’m super nervous about `:math`, because `:math` suggests it would drag in everything you see in common math functions like in most programming environments. That’s hard in our typeless formatting system. We made it super narrow for the purposes of dealing with the offset. I’m nervous about `:math` – I’m OK if we were to be super-religious that we only add things to `:math` when there are at least two guns to our head, which is sort of the offset thing, but we do need to decide how we’re going to deal with that over time, and I’ll bet an `:offset` function would suck too.

EAO: `:math` is an offset function, because effectively you can add or subtract integer values, and I think we’ve effectively limited it so that you can only add or subtract non-negative integer values that we allow to be limited to the small digit range. That’s 0 to 99\. I don’t think it’s perfect, but I think given this effective use case and requirement of supporting MF1 migration to MF2, I think it’s the least worst option we’ve come up with, and it’s strictly better than an offset option on `:number`. Unless somebody can think of something better for us to do, I would propose that Addison or I file a PR that un-drafts `:math` and we see if we can merge that.

MED: I share Addison’s qualms about `:math` because if we say `:math` it’s going to be a mess. I see two options: we have an offset function that only offsets – darn clear – or we have an `offset` option on `:number`. 

EAO: I mean, given that, one thing we could do is rename `:math` as `:offset` and keep its `add` and `subtract` options. One part of what’s confusing about `offset` is that it’s not clear which direction the offset is. If the option names are `add` and `subtract`, then I think it’s sufficiently clear what’s happening there.

APP: I agree. I note that one of the things we did not like about having an `offset` option is that it modifies the operand, or suggests that the operand is modified, and we try not to modify operands, like by doing math on them. Although `:math` is proposed as a selector and formatter, it’s really a way to make a `.local` assignment that you can then use as a number for selection. We made it a selector because it saves having to type `:number` after the selector. I would support renaming it and removing the ambiguity that it’s for anything else.

MED: Why don’t we say that it’s `decrement`? Function is `decrement` and the option is a positive integer. We don’t need to add in order to get compatibility with MF1.

EAO: We still need an option name, and I think `decrement` is quite a mouthful.

APP: It’s a little chewy, I think. Maybe `offset` and `amount`. “Only subtract” is what you’re suggesting, Mark?

MED: Yeah

APP: Offset value=2…

MED: Or the value could only be a negative integer. “Offset by”...

APP: `{$foo :offset by=2}`

EAO: I think there needs to be an indicator of the direction in which the offset is going. From the POV of a translator, they would likely be presented with something like the function name and the option name and the option value. I do not believe that anything other than `offset add` and `offset subtract` would be clearer than those. I also think that if we have something like `subtract`, we also ought to have `add`, because of the developer and user expectations that they would be able to do the operation in the opposite directions, even if we don’t find a reason why it’s strictly necessary.

RCH: I strongly agree with Eemeli on the importance of having the name indicate directionality. I’m also fairly against artificially constraining the input domain as a workaround for lack of that. Restricting it to negative numbers, or non-negative numbers, seems like a patch around the name failing to indicate direction.

MED: I don’t think `decrement` is much more technical than `offset`. We’re used to both. What’s a default? To a normal person, it’s something you do to a mortgage. Our intuitions are off. For the average person, there’s not much difference between “decrement” and “offset”. “Decrement” is very clear as to the direction.

APP: If I’m hearing correctly, the proposal is to create a PR that un-drafts the `:math` function, renames it as possibly `:offset`, possibly something else, and I’m hearing a couple people who think we should do both `add` and `subtract`. Do we want to fool with a design doc first, or just beat on a PR and see if we can get consensus?

EAO: I think we already had a design doc on this.

APP: Not about `:math`, but we had one about number selection. Quite an extensive one, with much blood spilled if I recall correctly. I will make a PR and we’ll be done with that and hopefully make progress that way.

MED: I put in some \[thesaurus\] links. We could say “counterpoise”, “recompense”, “atone for”. I like “atone for.”

APP: We’re going with “joggle”.

EAO: We want to keep in mind the core audience of translators who may speak English as a second or tertiary language.

MED: That was actually a joke

APP: I look forward to spilling many electrons onto GitHub and breaking our storage allotment in discussing the name of that in the near future.

### \#1067 Semantic Skeletons

APP: My proposal is to mark it ready for review. Do you want me to merge it and we’ll beat on designs, or continue to beat on the PR?

EAO: I want to look at that in the spirit of reviewing it rather than commenting on a draft.

APP: It’s a design with status proposed, and it is incomplete because there’s no proposed design. PR is fine.

EAO: The majority of what I recall as my concerns were about us possibly confusing, with some designs, leading users to confuse whether the functions we’ll end up with for date-time formatting are describing the thing being formatted, or the output of the formatting. How much opinion in the design and the functions do we need to put to specifying that – for example, a time function has its expected input as a time value rather than something else?

APP: I created the design piece with separate skeleton functions, and I took as the source for that the enumeration in the semantic skeletons part of CLDR. My thinking is that it describes the output because a lot of date/time values are of the historically incremental seconds since the Unix epoch flavor. So they have a date and a time in them, and what you would like to do is get “Monday” out of it, or get “February 3” out of it. So that’s what the functions are trying to do. Saying that there are a bunch of date and time values that cannot be used with specific functions and produce “bad operand”. That’s one approach; it’s clear for users because they get what they asked for and it separates the formatting, which is what the function name is, from the options, which are about field width, and it’s a nice clean separation. One does one thing, one does the other thing. The other ones – separate typed functions seem tied to Temporal in particular, at least they strike me as being tied to Temporal stuff. There’s a little bit of squidginess around the edges of “what do I do with these other time types”, e.g. timestamp values – how do they work, how do I get to and from floating time. The underspecificity of the other pieces of design makes me nervous because it’s really hard to compare without having fleshed that out.

EAO: The way I would prefer us to end up is with some system of options that is describing functions and their options, that is describing the output, and then recognizing that the input value that is being formatted by all of these is – can have a date, or maybe doesn’t have a date. Can have a time, or maybe it doesn’t have a time. Can have effectively a time zone, or it might not, so it doesn’t have an offset. The times and so on are maybe tied to Jan. 1 1970, or just describing completely floating stuff. And that some of these date/time formatters are going to complain for some of the inputs they are given, and that we are considering time zone as a specific thing that might be added on to a value effectively through an option value. 

APP: Added or removed?

EAO: I don’t know what “removed” means in this context when we’re talking about the output only.

MED: I think it means, if I have a structured type as the input, and it includes nanoseconds since the epoch and a time zone, then what Addison was saying is that the formatting could remove the time zone. If you didn’t ask for it along with the options for formatting, you wouldn’t see it.

EAO: That I understand, but I see that as happening because the time zone is not included in the formatting options. I don’t see what is supposed to happen if I explicitly, separately from that, remove a time zone from a value being formatted. 

APP: Offsets are more common. If you have an offset and you want to compute the fields and then not be showing the offset anymore…

MED: I really hate thinking about changing the – we’re not changing the input, we’re changing what we format.

APP: Yes, and the problem is that common timestamps have an implicit UTC time zone and no other information. Or they have an offset and what you want to do is get rid of the offset by recomputing the fields and getting the UTC. Then you want to use a real time zone to format the value. There’s two operations you go through to get the fields you want to actually see.

EAO: Is there a difference between removing the time zone or however you describe it, and then as an alternative to that, setting the time zone to UTC and then not including the time zone in the formatting output?

APP: Yes, I think so, because if you get a timestamp, the numbers in a UTC timestamp are not your local time. If you want to see local time, you take whatever time zone you want to express it in…

EAO: So that is setting the time zone to the local time, right?

APP: Yes, or some explicit time zone. If I send you a time stamp right now, to me it’s 10:30 AM but it’s not to you, but it’s the same numeric value.

EAO: I understand the operation of setting the time zone if it’s not in the input… I don’t understand what it would mean to remove a time zone from an input.

APP: So that’s called “floating the date” and what you want to do with that is, if you have a time value that you don’t want the time zone to affect, so if I tell you when my birthday is, if I send you that as a timestamp, it shouldn’t show a different date. What I want to say is “this date value should be floated so you don’t recompute the date”, if I’m making sense. It’s not in a time zone. I want to say “3:00” and I can just say “3:00” and it’s always 3:00, I don’t have a time zone to show you. That’s a floating value.

EAO: I still don’t see how that happens within the formatter, possibly in a way that isn’t reflected in another – setting the time zone or using the time zone of an input value, sort of an operation. Is it just me or does everybody else kind of understand what Addison is talking about.

APP: Let me try it in Temporal language. If you have a ZonedDateTime, you can turn it into a local date/time. It’s a type conversion.

EAO: But local is – in this case, because we’re formatting – explicitly the user’s default that we’re setting it to.

APP: So you might be passed a ZonedDateTime and you can explicitly say with your formatter, “float this value so it always shows the same amount regardless of time zone.”

EAO: So it’s effectively saying “use the time zone from the input”?

APP: “Compute the fields from the time zone and then forget you ever had a time zone”

EAO: But we don’t need to forget it…

APP: When I say “forget” I mean “don’t allow time zone or offset to further influence the value.” I’ve gotten to May 12, 2025 at 10:35 AM; just show that value regardless of context from here on out. So I have a local date/time value with no implied time zone.

EAO: In this case it would be effectively the same as formatting just the date and using the time zone of the input? So it’s not that we’re removing a time zone, it’s that we’re not modifying the time zone.

APP: Yeah, sort of. 

EAO: And then of course we get into the really fun part of defining what the resolved values of all of these are.

APP: We have a challenge, because there are different Temporal things in the world, and there are a huge number of programming environments that have no notion of Temporal; they have classical timekeeping only. We aren’t in the business of resolving all of that. We are in the business of saying “if you’re trying to format an hour and don’t have an hour field, that’s probably a bad thing.”

MIH: I’m thinking of how these functions can be chained. Really uneasy going down that path. I don’t think we should be in the business of changing one type from the programming language into another type. You should do that in your programming language, not in MessageFormat. When we go from an input to something else, should only touch it if it’s useful for i18n. We should not be in the business of making type conversions for you.

EAO: It also gets interesting when you start considering what happens with time zone. If we have – let’s say we’re formatting a date/time value that does not have a time zone, and then we specify a time zone as a function option, then this means that the formatted output is going to take that time zone into account. But does the resolved value take that into account and present, in whatever implementation-defined way, a DateTIme or a ZonedDateTIme or something that has the set time zone, or do we provide the raw input, whatever value that was, and then the bag of options that was used, and end up in a situation where we don’t need to modify any values but in order to use the resolved value in the same way as the function itself did, further processing is required?

APP: I think if you look at the design doc, I spell out a bunch of these things. My focus has been on “what are the operations that a message author or translator would want to do on date/time values when formatting on them, potentially selecting on them?” And not so much about transforming the values, but what do I want to do? Put it on the timeline, take it off the time zone, set the time zone it’s displayed in because the one I have is inconvenient. We should make sure we can do all those operations with the functions we end up with. This is in a way aside from the discussion of what should the functions be. Date and time stuff is complicated. Look how long it took to do Temporal in JS. Look at how much fun we’re having discussing it.

EAO: One thing we have in the current language is, if I remember right, you can’t use the value of a `:date` expression as the operand of a `:time` function. That, I think, is defined as an error, if I remember right. For some of these, even though we’re not a typed language, we can define how exactly our own functions within a message – have one declaration and then a further declaration that is using that value, certain combinations are problematic, potentially.

APP: We don’t actually say that correctly, I believe. We permit bad operand or bad option. Because your `:time` might not have a date. But as we talked about, there’s a bunch of implementation-defined date/time value types that have both. So that’s kind of weird if you destroy that.

EAO: “An implementation MAY emit an… error if appropriate… if…” (quoting from spec). Re-using a `:date` or `:time` might end up causing errors. If we go to the wider space of functions, this needs to be revisited potentially, because there’s going to be more cases and slightly fuzzier cases with these combinations. One question specifically that I think kind of links up with the `:unit` and `:currency` stuff is what happens – do we allow if the input contains a time zone, ZonedDateTime, something like this, and we’re formatting it and in the options we are specifying a time zone that is different from the input, whether this is treated as an error or may be treated as an error or it must work?

MIH: Trying to answer that question as a user, I would expect converting to the other time zone. One is part of the input – “We have a meeting at 5 PM New York Time”, and if I say “show me that in Los Angeles time”, I would expect the formatter to convert it to 2 PM. This is the input, show it as this.

APP: The Temporal people don’t agree – they think that’s an error. I think that’s a normal thing that people want to do.

MIH: It’s similar to unit formatters – you say “show me 1 meter” in the US locale, and it’s 1.75 meters, and the answer is 5 feet eleven or whatever the number is. You take it, convert it, and show it to me, the way I asked you.

APP: Should be an amusing time. I need to flesh out the other design pieces a bit more. Read the PR in the clear as opposed to in diff format, and see what I’m missing. Have I described the operations people want to do? Maybe what is missing is that I don’t have a section on error conditions. I think that’s the nub of some things, we should write down some of the challenges.

EAO: I believe that it will be very difficult for us to define a set of date/time functions that will not leave it so that there’s a lot of space for uncertainty about whether some things will work in all implementations, in particular when you start combining values coming from one function to another function. You have a `.input` to date, you use it as a formatted date, and separately you do a `.local` or just a placeholder with a `:time` on the value you already passed through `:date`. Exactly what comes out of all of that might work in one place but not elsewhere. I think coming up with a spec that’s going to have implementations behave the same way around those interactions is going to be quite difficult, unless we bring in quite heavy guardrails around what combinations are supported.

APP: Yes, including how options compose. If I said the month width was medium on a date, does a MonthDay inherit the medium-ness? Do I need to re-specify it?

MIH: One of the use cases I keep in mind is when we format to parts, you might get a string representation of the thing, but you might also get the input itself, in a way. When I say “your credit card expires on” this date, you get a placeholder, and this is the value, and a string representation maybe. If you do something like – if you want to produce a string that in the end is annotated for accessibility, what you do is put on screen something like “3/5/2025”, but the text-to-speech is going to take an object of type Date, and might actually say May 29, even if the text itself says “3/5". At least that’s how Android works. So I need access to the unmodified value. I don’t care about the fact that you render the month text as a number, I need it as a long thing, I don’t want to lose it.

EAO: So my strong preference would be to initially prohibit most combinations of date/time values being passed between functions. That is honestly relatively rare and in the places and messages that do want to do multiple things, in particular multiple overlapping things with a date/time value, that they would need to specify those things separately in the options bag, rather than being able to re-use some or all of the options.

APP: I would urge people to read the design doc and suggest additions if needed. I’ll take some of today’s discussions and add it on, including about errors and the value space. We should have more discussion around the value place. We will talk again about this in a future call.

EAO: Can we talk next time about the goals update? It got touched on last week and is currently as draft, but it would be great to have that overall advance.

APP: I agree, and that’ll be our key focus next time, as opposed to the things we’ve been working on. We at least cleared the decks somewhat today. Maybe we’ll take a week off from talking about semantic skeletons 

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 28 open (was 28 last time).

* 19 are tagged for 48  
* 3 are tagged “Future”  
* 13 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 1 is tagged Feedback  
* 0 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 3 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion (see below)  
* 0 are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#866 | CLDR semantic datetime skeleton spec is nearly ready and MF2 should use it | Discuss |
| \#978 | Interoperability concerns and normative-optional features | Discuss |
| \#1051 | Plans for v48 | Discuss |

