### February 7th, meeting Attendees
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Batjaa Batbold - Amazon (BAT)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla/OpenJS (EAO)

 ### Agenda 
 
This is the first of the weekly meetings of the WG, and will focus on aliases/macros; a feature mentioned previously in #209, and included in each of our current three spec proposals:
Eemeli: syntax / data model / error handling
Staś: syntax / data model / runtime
Mihai: description
Questions that may be answered by this discussion:
Should aliases/macros be included in the spec?
      Yes - > 70%
 
Should we call them aliases, macros, or something else?
     
Should they use the same namespace as variable or function references, or have their own?
In the syntax, should its assignment and use be marked with the same or different sigils?
Can they take literal values?
Can they take placeholder values?
Can their value consist of a sequence of parts?
Can their value contain a selector?
Should they be allowed to contain translatable content?
Should they be considered translatable or not translatable by default?
If the value is not translatable, should it be represented in XLIFF as a part the message text, originalData (not translatable), resourceData (translatable), a separate message, or something else?
If the value is translatable, should it be represented in XLIFF as a part the message text, originalData (not translatable), resourceData (translatable), a separate message, or something else?
If you have additional questions in mind, please post them in the comments below. I'll send a poll about these to the mailing list in the next few days, to get a bit of a baseline on where we're starting from.
 
EAO: We have clear yes on having Alias/Macros but the results speak for themselves.
 
STA : 
 
MF2: Questions on Aliases/Macros (Responses)
 

GWR: What exactly is the scope of aliases/macros? Macros sound like they’re executing code. Aliases might be confused with grammatical category aliases, e.g. “possessive” versus case=genitive. There are also “phrases” which are fragments of sentences (STA: reusable by multiple messages?)


EAO: Alias a way of storing a value of variable with options to be reused across multiple places, Example we can reuse it the formatter in different place in a single message, I understand that aliases and macros in MIH and STA proposals allow for this sort of usage and also allow for value of an alias or macro to be contained 


GWR : I think we should use the correct terminology that would improve the amount of reeducation and be aligned with “standards of linguistics”

STA : I disagree with use of any code name if alias/macros are problematic I suggest that 

EAO: The prior art for choosing the naming conventions was based on YAML

MIH: +1 to use “local variables”

EAO: Any considerations about Local variables ? 

GWR : I have questions about  “how to reference a variable ?”

## Presenting syntax about Aliases to Expression using local variables 

$item = {$item asNoun count=$count case=accusative}
$count = {$count asNumber maximumFractionDigits=0}

{$count plural}?
    one [You bought a {$color asAdj accord=$item} {$item}.]
    _ [You bought {$count} {$color asAdj accord=$item} {$item}.]

—

$item = {$item asNoun count=$count case=accusative}
$count = {$count asNumber maximumFractionDigits=0}
$color = {$color asAdj accord=$item}

{$count plural}?
    one [You bought {$color article=indefinite} {$item}.]
    _ [You bought {$count} {$color} {$item}.]

# Use-cases:
Provide the functionality of MF1’s #.
Avoid repetition for calls with many flags.
Consistency.
Carry the grammatical information with the noun.
Allow complex values to be passed as option values: foo(1, option=bar(2)) → foo(1, option=$barOf2)
Improve translation experience by reducing the amount of code inside the pattern.

# Consensus
Don’t allow shadowing/reassignment


ZBI: Not comfortable with shadowing / reassignment.

MIH: Use convention to disambiguate: $itemInAccusative.

#

$roomsFrag = {{$roomCount}? 1 [1 room] _ [{$roomCount} rooms]}
$suitesFrag = {{$suiteCount}? 1 [1 suite] _ [{$suitesCount} suites]}
$guestsFrag = {{$guestCount}? 1 [1 guest] _ [{$guestsCount} guests]}

{$roomCount}? {$suiteCount}? {$guestCount}?
    1 1 1 [This isn't a hotel, okay?]
    _ _ _ [This hotel has {$roomsFrag} and {$suitesFrag}, accommodating up to {$guestsFrag}.]

# Use-cases
Avoid combinatorial explosion in case of complex multi-selector messages
open(link, title=”Hello, {$username}”) → open(link, title=$linkTitle) 


# Consensus



ADP : This case it’s the the typical bug of doing message fragments to assemble a string ? 

MIH : This was introduced where we discussed selection inside the message versus message level. Programmers have always a way to go around it,

EAO: My suggestions are : 
1 - Include message in the spec then we don’t need to allow for these local variables to support translatable text content. ?
2- If we do not support message references in the spec, then we do need to allow thi tu support translatable content  ? 

MIH: I was hoping this would help avoid it by using message references, if they solve the same thing, or they are global vs local variables ? I see a risk of having different messages

GWR: I want to be able to handle something like:

I can't find {$relationship definitenesss=indefinite} in your addressbook. What is your {$relationship case=genitive} phone number?
-->
I can't find an uncle in your addressbook. What is your uncle's phone number?
I language like Hebrew and Arabic will have to change "your" in some way that is different than English.

We have a concept of local variable , and by experience if we don’t provide it Engineers will do it anyway. 

MIH: Macros are really for thing that are used in this message not shared across messages

EAO: I suggest a separate discussion for use cases not covered by macros but adjacent to them.
  
I would prefer a model where a message would be simpler in structure and would contain at most multiple different cases/variants of the same message. IMHO having a message with local variables that are themselves text in my spec proposal its a message group, that it’s a flat grouping of messages. Limit message references to only be able to refer to message in the immediate (adjacents) of the source message mean that you have all message contents that applies there. This would avoid complexity of a single message containing fragments.

… 
