### February 14th, meeting Attendees

- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)

- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)

- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)

- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)

- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)

- Batjaa Batbold - Amazon (BAT)

- Addison Phillips - Amazon (AP)

- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)



### **Agenda** 

Message references are rather variably supported in our current spec proposals:



* Eemeli: [syntax](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/ez-spec/spec-syntax.md#message-references) / [data model](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/ez-spec/spec-data-model.md#messageref) / [value resolution](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/ez-spec/spec-formatting.md#messageref) / [message selection](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/ez-spec/spec-message-selection.md)
* Staś: not included
* Mihai: example of message references via [custom user-defined formatting function](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kqD0gy5x1mfiF2PAegjcNCAc98snTAqtbxccxfLcpNo/edit#heading=h.abzda7aveso5)

Questions that may be answered by this discussion:



* Should message references be included in the specification?
* Should message references be included as their own entity in the data model?
* How far can a message reference reach (i.e. only to messages in same group/same resource/anywhere)?
* Should a message reference be able to set/define variables for the referred message?
* What is the resolved value of a message reference (a formatted string, a stringifiable object with metadata, or something else)?
* Can message references be used as selector values?
* Can the resolved metadata value of a message reference be used as a selector value?

Survey results: [https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1zH0fIleGVrwXatDZDUh7VhL6DYMXvRTNnrqYthkjrIo/viewanalytics](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1zH0fIleGVrwXatDZDUh7VhL6DYMXvRTNnrqYthkjrIo/viewanalytics)

**### Notes**

STA: Let’s go through the use-cases from the survey, make sure we’re on the same page for each of them, and consider other solutions can support them.

AP: Let’s go over them and understand which are two-way doors.

EAO: 1) Is this a use-case that we want MF2 to solve? 2) Are message references are the right solution?

**#### Use-Case 1**

EAO: Combinatorial explosion. Should we solve it? SHould we use msgrefs to solve it?

AP: They are different classes of combinatorial explosion. Can imagine a lot of extreme use-cases, e.g. all Amazon’s product categories in a single message. Or the “bone dragon” use-case. (cf [https://github.com/projectfluent/fluent/issues/80](https://github.com/projectfluent/fluent/issues/80))

MIH: Some use-cases can be solved by local variables which we discussed last week. Some other can likely be solved by list formatters.

GWR: LIst formatter is a great way to solve many of these problems.

ZBI: Not a rare problem. The direction of the evolution of UIs: simple context-less statements → complex context-sensitive dynamic use-cases. We’re not only designing for the problems of today. Also for the problems 10 years from now. It’s not going to only be a sentence with a plural form, or a plural form and a gender select. It’s going to be messages with 5 or 10 variables. The mental model of looking at the last 20 years is not sufficient to design a solution for the next 10.

EAO: … (sorry, I missed it)

STA: Two different problems: the “bone dragon” can be solved with the same thing we design for glossaries (human names, product names, etc.) The “hotels” problem can be solved with local variables to message fragments. Looking for the least bad solution.

MIH: if a string depends on many variables, these variables likely come from other places than message resources. And some features in the main message might depend on ALL items taken together (for example the gender of a list of items). 

DAF: I answered “yes” in a few cases, but “only if translatability is guaranteed”. A lot of these use-cases can be solved by a sophisticated list formatted (request a grammatical case, a plural form etc). ITS: [https://www.w3.org/TR/its20/](https://www.w3.org/TR/its20/)

ZBI: I think NLG will eventually blend with MF2 to generate those sophisticated messages "on fly" and MF2 data will be used eventually in three ways:

* Produce a "string" to display \
* Produce a "UI fragment" to embed in UI \
* Produce a data to feed into NLG model that will generate final representation

The lowest common denominator use case is the first one, the Rich UI Web will rely on the second, and Ambient UI systems will increasingly rely on the last consumption model.

Would we be ok limiting the quality of messages that can be produced in use case 1 and stating that if your system needs very sophisticated natural sounding system you will need to go beyond MF2 and add NLG?

I want to stress that my concern about my proposed "use NLG" solution to complex messages is that it is reinforcing digital divide - if you're a rich powerful organization you can have your nice Russian UI. If you are a small Web tool, sorry, nice sounding Russian costs.

but the solution maybe is to advocate for open source NLG systems to be paired with MF2 inputs?

**#### Use-Case 2**

EAO: Let’s move on. Should we use messages as morphological glossaries?

MIH: I’d like to avoid situations where we encourage concatenation. Also, a single noun in English can be two different nouns in Romanian.

_(Not a lot of discussion here, but many opinions already covered in use-case 1.)_

**#### Use-Case 3**

EAO: Should we use messages for consistency in branding?

MIH: Sometimes used for changing names of companies, products etc. But such changes might require changes to the public API of the brandname message. Still need to go through hundreds of messages to accommodate a new meta-property (e.g. gender).

AP: 

DAF: Branding is somewhat more rigid than terminology management. I don’t think you can manage the transition from one brandname to another. Some companies enforce no changes even in morphological languages.

EAO: Mozilla actually does this for Firefox, Firefox Nightly etc.

MIH: I see two separate problems: a) a company name which changes rarely b) a product name, of which there may be many at the same time (e.g. different Kindle readers)

STA: Is branding a different use-case than the one of morphological glossaries?

EAO: Probably not.

DAF: It’s a sub-problem. If you have a solution to morphological glossaries, you can also do branding. If not, you may still want to solve the branding problem.

**#### Use-Case 4**

EOA: “Click __continue__ to proceed”
