### August 15th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda

- Past meeting Actions
- Implementation Status
- Review PR’s & Open Issues
- Message resource WG

## Past meeting Actions

- [ ] Consensus about what we should do next regarding meeting cadence, should we cancel extended meetings ?

RCA: Can we revisit whether we need our weekly extended meetings?

EAO: Let's revisit this question later in the meeting.

## Implementation Status

MIH : I have a design doc and it’s posted for review and it’s how public API should look for ICU, about implementation. I have something working, and I’m using a JSON file provided by EAO to analyze how the JS implementation is working on tests.

I found some parts that I don’t think we should support due to the fact that they aren't specified.

As soon as I have a more “stable” implementation I will share the PR.

EAO: The [JSON test data](https://github.com/messageformat/messageformat/blob/master/packages/mf2-messageformat/src/__fixtures/test-messages.json) is entirely authored by me. It currently has an Apache2 license. If there is a place that I can publish it that is more usable, then I am happy to do it.

ECH : Can you put it in the repo?

EAO : I can add it and modify license accordingly with needs, I can PR against `main` or `develop`, what do you think?

MIH: I would say put it in the `develop` branch along with the working spec. Once the spec is ready, we merge it to `main`.

EAO: Some parts are specific to my implementation, like testing for error codes, which I don't think is relevant to the common spec.

MIH: I did some minor modifications. If in your test is an error array and gets an error it just passes, I consider no error.

EAO: That is correct.

RCA: What is the status of the implementation work?

EAO: The JS work is effectively done, and it's available on npm as [messageformat@next](https://www.npmjs.com/package/messageformat/v/next).

There are some details about inconsistencies found but aren’t published yet (how markup it’s handled and how its stringification is black-boxed as we agreed). Tooling is also available to parse ICU MessageFormat 1 and Fluent messages for use by the MessageFormat 2 runtime. There are some updates that I haven't yet released, like the 2-way sync between MF2 and Fluent. Please give it a try. It implements the API in the ECMA-402 `Intl.MessageFormat` proposal for JS that I am championing.

RCA: I think this deserves a blog post to announce the work that you have done.

ECH: I think it’s really interesting to get more feedback and see how people in general feel.

MIH:

```
let $foo = {$count :number currency=$cur precision=2 rounding=up}
let $pers = {$foo :person level=formal}
let $bar = {$pers :date skeleton=yMMMdE}
match {$bar}
   when 1 {...}
   when one {...}
   when male {...}
   when foggy {...}
   when * {...}
```

Here is an example of our current working syntax. Something like this is legal, and I saw an instance of this in our JSON test data. However, I think this is confusing for a user, and it is not clear what the expected behavior should be.

EAO: It might be more helpful to paste the data from JSON to be more direct trying to solve the problem

MIH: This is not a strawman argument, I have to implement.

EAO: I don't think anyone is asking you to implement a cast from a person to a date.

MIH: Is that a cast?

EAO: There should be an example where there are 2 local variables, and one depends on the other, and one is being used as a selector.

MIH:

```
let $foo = {$bar}
match {$foo}
when one {one}
when * {other}
...
```

This is what the syntax allows. I think someone mentioned back in March that local variables should not refer to other local variables. 1) It is unclear what the use case is 2) It makes the implementation messy and opens to recursion that is complex.

I would like to disallow this unless there is a clear use case.

EAO: Right now we included in the spec that it's not legal to have a dependency loop on local variables.

The spec as we currently have it certainly allows things like `$bar` depend on `$foo`, and `$baz` depend on `$bar`. It requires a parser to detect whether we have a cycle in the declaration dependencies.

For potential use cases… We have a way of saying certain shapes come from a custom fn and we want to use two different fields as local variables, the benefit comes from not having to duplicate code in local variables that depend on the same thing.

You are not going to find a grammatical use for this that cannot be worked around, but it can greatly simplify the creation of a message where you have a person and you need the person's name and the person's age.

RCA: Should we be more strict ont he recommendation we make in the spec? We already have a recommendation regarding cycles of dependencies.

MIH: No, what it doesn't cover is messing with types and changing types. So it makes it difficult for the custom function to know what it should return.

It requires that the local variables that depend on each other have the same functions. Declaring that constraint might help, but if the function options specified for each of the local variables differ even when the functions are the same, is that okay or not?

```
let $foo = {$amount :currency precision ….}
let $bar = {$foo :currency minfractional=2}
```

I think that seeing EAO's code would be more helpful to understand.

EAO: This question is different from the question about local variables depending on each other. If we had a local variable used inline in a formatter statement... I think the answer here is that we define this through the function registry. The registry will define what the inputs and outputs are for a function.

In one of the examples you provide, you had a person object, and you were feeding it into a date. When we have the registry, we can throw an error when types don't match.

MIH: This pushes the registry beyond what I imagined. This is a registry of formatter functions. The functions in the registry are not general transformational functions. The registry functions should be for formatting only, not free-form functions. If that is not the case, then we have a potentially bigger problem.

EAO: I would say that, any of things we mention are part of the test suite, are what we should discuss. We shouldn't talk about this question right now because it's not in the test suite.

MIH: The problem still remains that I can choose to not support this in the current ICU tech preview, but these are valid in the spec. It is not clear what the expected behavior should be.

The other question I have is whether a selection pattern should allow a selector to be specified without an associated formatting function. For example:

```
match {$bar}
   when 1 {...}
   when one {...}
   when male {...}
   when foggy {...}
   when * {...}

match {$bar}
   when 1 {...}
   when * {...}
```

We have talked previously about plural selection messages needing the plural formatter in order to truly make a correct selection on the formatted number. The formatter matters in order to give the formatted number, and selection cannot correctly occur prior to formatting.

So I would suggest that we alway require a formatter specified in the selector to avoid such problems.

ZBI: So, I generally agree with MIH with problem definition. In my mind it’s possible to define a function that can accept different types. My intention was to use metadata to annotate semantic comments to help define the types of message and allow tooling to reason about this.

A type definition for the $bar would be more important than the definition

EAO: My main point is that what you're effectively presenting there is how the MessageFormat v1 currently works.

MIH: In MF1 you have to define if `plural` or `select` for a selection message. But that allows you to know what that selector does. `select` means you have a literal match, whereas `plural` means you need to treat the input as a formatted number. I would argue that function it’s more important than the type.

A function is useful because if I say `{foo :gender}` because I go to the registry, take the `:gender` function, and look at the matches of \_\_\_. So the type is less important than the function.

ZBI: What you want to do is pass the same the same variable to 2 different functions.

MIH: That's totally fine, it's fine today.

ZBI: Do you want to create a function that takes a union type (say a number or a string), and require the function to negotiate (dispatch) on behavior on the type.

RCA: I did not see a resolution or action point on the previous question. What do we want to do with that.

EAO: I don't think there is anything to do, unless MIH wants to open an issue.

MIH:

Here is a pattern `{Hello {$foo :fn1} and {$foo :fn2}}` where `fn1(input: String | Number)` and `fn2(input: Number | Boolean)`.

ZBI: I am trying to reason about what you said before, and I think we should think about this a lot. This is what I was envisioning for Fluent and want us to think about for MessageFormat v2.

```
// $foo (String) - Name of the person (example: “John”)
{Hello {$foo :fn1} and {$foo :fn2}}
```

I want the CAT tool to be able to take metadata for `$foo` to show a snippet so that the translator can see information about `$foo` when translating with live feedback. I don't think you can implicitly deduce that from the function signature.

MIH: I agree that example is useful, but as a translator, I don't think it matters if a date formatter potentially takes a Date object, a Calendar object, a milliseconds from epoch value, etc.

ZBI: What was discussion of the previous question?

MIH: For my implementation, I won't allow a local variable to reference another local variable. I will also require all selectors to be invoked with a function.

ZBI: How do you test for recursion in the local variable dependencies?

MIH : I don’t, because disallowing the dependencies prevents the problem to begin with.

EAO : Can you you list things on the `develop` branch (spec) that you might not implement or is underspecified or it’s not useful to implement ?

MIH: I'm arguing that these features are not useful and error prone, and should therefore be disallowed in the spec.

EAO: Are you saying that doing so isn't possible?

ZBI: No, it's possible, it's all code, anything is possible.

MIH: Yes, it's possible, but it's error prone, so I don't think we should entertain them in the spec.

EAO: MIH, can you file issues for these 2 topics and describe the issues in them?

MIH: Yes.

RCA: To clarify, these issues won't block your implementation, right?

MIH: Yes and no. I should know what the resolution to these issues are to know whether I need to do further work. But I have already said what I am currently doing about them in the meantime in my tech preview implementation.

EAO: So long as we have documentation about these issues, we can proceed. And anyways, we wouldn't have time to wait for a resolution on these issues and finish a tech preview before the deadline.

ZBI: MIH, I hope you can file an issue to describe what you're doing. Also, you could write tests. In my implementation, I have a parser that has a dirty state in order to address security concerns. We need to test against "billion laughs attack" (probably Billion laughs attack).

I'm concerned about the recursion possibility if we allow message references, and maybe we should detect cycles there, too.

Conclusion:

- [ ] MIH will file 2 issues for the 2 questions brought up about cycles in local variable dependencies, and requiring functions for selector invocations.
- [ ] MIH will file an issue about potential cycles among message reference dependencies.
- [ ] EAO will file an issue about protecting against the Billion laughs attack, which includes mention of whether limits on the return string, etc. are needed by implementations or not, etc.

## Issue [#268](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/268)

MIH: I am okay with the related PR #290.

EAO: Does anyone have concerns about the pull request, or can we merge now?

MIH: I am fine.

EAO: When we get the +1 from MIH, then I will merge the PR.

RGN: Everything falls into different categories. We have ASCII control characters, we have the Unicode non-characters. That is the only set I would push for to disallow. It would be unusual to see them in strings. When you do a sampling of them across languages, it seems difficult to include them in strings.

EAO: I think 2 things are happening here. By the time that we see a string, it has already come from a resource format like JSON that would already have had an escaping method to represent such characters. Let's say you have a null character representation in JSON, then it comes to MessageFormat as a null character code point.

RGN: I think that would be misleading because it will look like a nonprinting character, and so

MIH: I disagree that such strings necessarily need to represent visually non-printing characters in order to represent them. I think it is not the job of MessageFormat to validate the strings. This is something that should be handled at the edges of the system, but not in every step in between.
Example of API that takes a string with the 0 character: the lpstrFilter in
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/commdlg/ns-commdlg-openfilenamea

ECH: Please look at information from the Unicode book (core spec) https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/268#issuecomment-1212540949

I think it touches upon a lot of aspects of our previous discussions on the topic. Initially, I wasn't sure how to understand the topic, and my instinct was to prevent MessageFormat from having to enforce a position on the principle of keeping separate concerns from getting intertwined, in order to avoid complexity. But I feel like the points and practical points about the frequency of such uncommon characters and the efficiency concerns if multiple layers of the application stack had to repeat string validity checks, plus ICU's approach which is a garbage in, garbage out approach for efficiency reasons and for not taking a position on user intention, all makes me more confident in my original inclination

RGN: It still is in the control of this group to decide what is allowed. After PR #290, that set of allowed characters will be slightly smaller. But we still are allowing characters that are control characters and defined to never be a character. That is a valid stance, however, other formats disallow it.

EAO: Maybe we have a different perspective here because messages will exist in resource formats and representations, and they will

MIH: The MessageFormat API doesn't care about how messages are stored and serialized. If someone wants to store messages in JSON, I can do so, including escaping characters. But it is a concern in between the storage and MessageFormat, but it is not the job of MessageFormat to enforce it.

RGN: I think JSON is a good analogy. JSON is any sequence of UTF-16 code units, but you can't represent them raw. Because the textual format of those characters for interchange. MessageFormat, as described, is similar.

EAO: I think the difference is that MessageFormat \_\_\_.

RGN: If that is the case, then there is no reason to define that MessageFormat is not a textual representation at all. Just say that a string is just a sequence of code points, and that absolves you of the concern at all. That description is what I'm hearing from MIH.

MIH: What I am saying is that different levels have different concerns. For example,

http://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/xliff-core/v2.1/os/xliff-core-v2.1-os.html#cp
“Represents a Unicode character that is invalid in XML”

DAF: BTW, this method is taken from Unicode LDML

RGN: What I'm referring to is the textual representation of the message, not what can or cannot be handled in the in-memory structure by the MessageFormat runtime.

ECH: Let's understand what RGN is saying. So the problem that you're talking about is the textual form of how a person may author a message, say in some source code. And because this textual form will get copy-and-pasted around, it should avoid the common pitfalls of interchange between systems by being explicit about that serialized text form for.

RGN: Yes.

ECH: Okay, so I do see the concern. It still does seem like a concern of how a message gets serialized, which we have no control over -- how control character may be escaped is as much of an implementation detail as whether the serialization is UTF-8 or UTF-16 encoded, or whether the container format is JSON, XML, Fluent, or something else. So it's a separate concern, and so I wouldn't go so far as to say that MessageFormat should enforce anything at the serialization level. But I think it would be okay for the spec to point out the problem and give a strong recommendation to implementers and users to be mindful of this problem.

EAO: In the example of someone emailing a message to someone else, the key here is that every one of these container formats, there is their own version of escape characters in that container format of special characters. So it may be that you are not ever really able to copy paste messages without being aware of the container format.

RGN: I don't share that confidence. People will copy paste messages, from console or source control. I think that if you say that MessageFormat is an object, then you will see people copy-paste messages and that will lead to the propagation of control characters.

MIH: I think these are separate concerns. If I, as the MessageFormat runtime, see a control character, then I won't necessarily know how it was originally serialized on disk. Nor would I need to know.

Java code:

```
String msg = "{Hello \u0000 world}”;
mf2 = MessageFormat2.parse(msg);
```

ZBI: I'm slightly concerned about the assumptions that you are making here, MIH. For version control systems, it is important to have a round trip that you can serialize and parse. With Fluent, we had a problem with lossiness where we used the replacement character. Part of the solution was to escape whitespace and to remember whether a character was escaped or unescaped.

EAO: I think a slightly different level of approach. This is a good introduction to having a working group for having a resource for messages. So that we can have a canonical resource specification, and then we can describe there how to serialize messages, including how to escape characters.

ZBI: I'm not sure I agree with the idea of moving the discussion to a resource format, which is not addressing the issues. Then we allow any sort of system to give us a stream of bytes, and we open the possibility of non-round tripping of messages.

EAO: I think that is an implementation detail.

ECH: I agree that it is an implementation detail. And the argument of having non-resource format based systems likes DBs, etc. supplying messages is actually all the more reason for not enforcing this restriction in MessageFormat itself, and keep it in the serialization format, in order to not intertwine separate concerns.

RGN: But factually, there is a serialization format, because that is the syntax spec that we have in the `develop` branch. And if we want to be permissive of problematic characters, then more work needs to be done.

MIH: I would say that the syntax is not a serialization formation.

RGN: It literally is. We have an EBNF description. Sure, we can describe it as a data structure, but we have a syntax for the textual form.

MIH: It is a separation of concerns. In my implementation, I parse into the data structure, and the syntax represents what is in memory logically, but that has no bearing on the serialized form.

EAO: For MessageFormat, we have to solve it for the general case. I recognize, RGN, that this is not exhaustive of all of the use cases, such as directly getting messages from an external system, or console logging messages, and if we copy and paste, the result will be misleading. If we can describe a canonical message resource message syntax, then we can solve the problem of interchange through escaping in a consistent way.

ECH: I want to observe that I think we are talking about 2 different things, and that we all seem to agree on one of them. We are talking about the syntax of what allowed in the in-memory representation, and then there is the syntax the serialized form of messages. From what I've just heard, I think we are all in agreement that the in-memory form does not need to place any restrictions on the code points of the Unicode string coming in as input to the API.

However, we need a separate syntax to cover the concept of what is allowed for a serialized string, which we are also referring to, and we need to tease these 2 separate concepts apart.

RGN: The syntax we have worked on is in fact the syntax of those serialized forms.

ECH: I want to make another observation, which is that I think we are looking at the syntax, as we have in the `develop` branch, and we are seeing the same thing and interpreting it differently. So I think we're talking past each other.

So the question I think we all don't share the same answer to is: What does the syntax represent -- the string to be parsed into the API that directly determines the in-memory representation, or is it the serialized form of the message that a user might author? If we continue this discussion, I think this would be a good starting point so that we can avoid talking past each other and instead discuss from a common understanding.

## Review PR's & Open Issues

## Message resource WG
