### August 22nd, meeting Attendees
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)



## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)



### Agenda
 
- PR [#294](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/294) Explain the liberal Text
- Issue [#292](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/292) Spec clarification: resolving the type when chaining local variables
- Issue [#293](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/293 ) Spec clarification: selection without a function
 
 
## PR [#294](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/294): Explain the liberal Text
 
RGN: We had discussion on this topic last week, and there was followup discussion. I was convinced to come around with what seems like the majority opinion, which is to allow anything that is valid in a Unicode format as valid. This is basically in line with what the majority opinion is.  However, I included verbiage to advise users about intended usage because unusual characters could appear unescaped.
 
EAO: Is anyone opposed?
 
STA: I took a look, it looked good to me.
 
MIH: It sounds good to me. My opinion is that the unusual characters are not that unusual, which was my only reason for objection.
 
STA: Have we ever considered picking an unusual escape character?
 
MIH: We had a discussion at some point, I don’t remember who was present, and we discussed whether it would be okay to use a character outside of ASCII. And I think MWS strongly advised against this from some prior experience.
 
STA: Okay, just curious. I didn’t want to derail this discussion.
 
EAO: As for me, I don’t think there is another candidate for escaping other than backslash.
 
STA: Yes, and there is no reason to change things now.
 
## Issue [#292](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/292) Spec clarification: resolving the type when chaining local variables
 
 
 
## Issue [#293](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/293 ) Spec clarification: selection without a function
 
EAO: Summary: the issue proposes to disallow having selectors declared in a selection message that doesn’t specify its formatting function.
 
MIH: Actually, ZBI is agreement with the proposal in the issue.
 
EAO: One aspect that wasn’t clear to me is whether we’re talking about a limitation in the resulting data structure of the message or a limitation imposed on the syntax.
 
MIH: I would say that we shouldn’t allow it. When I parse the message, I should expect to get an error there. If we enforce this in the syntax / data structures, it would make parsing messier. I would be fine just throwing an error in the parser.  One reason is because of ZBI’s point – we can always add it later, which would be a backwards compatible change.
 
STA: My initial reaction is in line with ZBIs, but I am still thinking about it.
 
EAO: Making this change would make it difficult if not impossible to convert Fluent into MessageFormat v2. Fluent has a structure in which a selector is implicitly typed, and it would make existing Fluent impossible to convert to MFv2 syntax in an automated manner.
 
MIH: I would argue that the same problems of going from Fluent to MFv2 … because of that migration, we would be willing to pay the price of living with errors in lint. 
 
ECH:

1. Being consistent means requiring the formatting function for a selector, as we know we have to do for plurals
2. How are Fluent messages not automatically upgradable to MFv2?
 
STA: What are the reasons for forbidding this bare style of selectors?  How is that different from linting inside placeholders?
 
MIH: In the issue itself, I explain the disadvantages. One is that if I see `match {$foo} * {...}`, I don’t know as a translator what type of case match values that correspond to the selector.  Second is I don’t know how to lint such messages. Third, is in Fluent, if I have a plural (number) match, and the input numerical value is 1, I don’t know to distinguish between `“1”` and `”ONE”`.  It creates a risky runtime feature.
 
STA: If we have a risky runtime, then the runtime is broken.  For the problem in placeholders, we expect that everything should be stringifiable.  For the first issue, I can see the problem there.  I thought we were working on the assumption that most tools don’t let translators touch messages.
 
EAO: ECH, in Fluent, you can have different variants in a selection message. The syntax of Fluent doesn’t require an annotation for what type of value selection should be performed on. Only at runtime is that type is known.  At runtime, we wrap values as a NumberValue for plural selects.  The actual behavior ends up depending on the runtime value. In Fluent, it’s not required to expect the input value be of a certain type, so we don’t know if the input is the number 1 or if it’s the string `”ONE”`.
 
ECH: I see the problem, but it sounds like a Fluent problem.  We want to have a clear contract between the inputs of a formatter function and the output, and it relates to what I said earlier, which is that we select on formatted value.
 
EAO: This is related to whether a user has the ability to pass options to a formatter.  What is the value of a value in a match statement. I think we should support partially formatted values in a select statement, and allow partially formatted values equal to other values.  It is hard for me to see how that would work if we always require functions for selectors.
 
MIH: I want to refer back to a point from STA. He asked how is this (selectors) different from placeholders?  Most of the times, placeholders can be black boxes and they “just work” for formatting.  Selectors are not black boxes.  The tools won’t know what type of value the selector represents.  The idea that EAO was describing, that a formatted value would have methods on how to format itself, is 
 
The argument of not supporting a one-way upgrade from Fluent messages to MFv2 is not a strong reason, and even by that measure, MessageFormat v1 is more established and widely used of a format so that should be more of a concern than Fluent for upgradeability, and we already acknowledged that it is a non-goal.
 
STA: I acknowledge that we don’t want to put formatting functions in placeholders, that would be wasteful.. I think there is a point about consistency to be made. We all agree that we want to skip formatting functions in placeholders.  So if that is the case, then how is this case of selectors consistent with that of placeholders?
 
EAO: I think there are 3 layers of type detection for linters, formatters, etc.  If we always have a function attached to a selector, then we don’t need to lookup what the type is. The second lookup is, say if we’re matching  `match {$foo} * {...}`, then we could have `$foo` set by a local variable with a well-defined type.  The third level is to look into the semantic comments in the message that declares that `$foo` is a number, which allows a linter / tooling to have access to that info.  My sense is that the place this becomes questionable, where the arguments are valid, are the questions about tooling and validation. We are likely to end up with more than one solution.  So maybe we end up with a selector without a function being a linting problem rather than a syntax problem.
 
ECH: To STA’s point, I think we do indeed want to have formatting functions specified for placeholders, and correct me if I’m wrong, but we allow placeholders without functions with the assumption that the implicit function is a “.toString()”, and we leave it to the implementations to decide.
 
MIH: Some of the points that EAO raised are good. For example, in my implementation, whenever I select for plurals, I always make it a separate type.  Selecting on a number is not enough – plurals are a different animal. If all I have is a numerical value, is the plural supposed to be ordinal or cardinal?, etc.
 
What exactly are saving by not requiring to have a formatter function for the selector? What is the benefit, exactly?
 
STA: The argument about the local variable is a good one. Say you define it at the top of the message, and then match on it.  Maybe it’s a matter of convenience over semantics.  I don’t think we don’t want to enforce formatting functions in placeholders everywhere, which is why we have local variables.  That’s a bigger quality of life improvement.  So maybe it would be a little bit inconsistent, but I think it would be good to say that if we use a local variable as a selector, then the definition of the local variable must include a formatting function.
 
EAO: One possible expansion direction if we consider partially formatted values as first class citizens – can you use a partially formatted value as a selector, provided that selection functionality is provided for it?  It would be good to be able to provide a value to a formatting function that specifies the range of output values.  Could it be possible to use the metadata to specify that information to help tooling and humans understand how it works?  Is it possible to allow implementations to decide the formatting for selectors without functions?
 
MIH: Regarding metadata, you can theoretically specify all the information for output values, but why?  We would have all that information already in the registry.  We shouldn’t have to specify that again in metadata of the messages.
 
Regarding STA’s comments on local variables, yes, local variables are convenient to avoid repeating formatting options, etc, in placeholders.  But the benefit of reuse when it comes to selectors is minimal – there is only one instance in a message of a selector declaration, so the reuse argument goes away.
 
When it comes to supporting partially formatted values, we should be supporting new value types by adding a new function that supports that type.  So to say that they are not a first class ci
 
ECH: Yes, I didn’t understand how partially formatted values are different from any other type, so what I wanted to say is the same as how MIH expects things to work.  So I am not sure what “first-class citizen” means for a type, but I am wary. The point of having these interfaces for formatting and selection functions and a registry to put your implementations is the whole point of allowing you to bring your own types and implementations.
 
EAO: The question of whether selectors should be allowed without a function is an implementation decision, as we decided before.
 
MIH: I don’t think we decided on this before.
 
STA: I think it needs to be implementation specific.
 
MIH: Whether or not you require a function for a selector is orthogonal to whatever your set of formatting functions in your registry happens to be.
 
I haven’t heard a use case of where it is beneficial to use a selector without a formatting function.
 
EAO: Same reason as the `#` symbol in ICU MessageFormat.  It automatically formats the number and selects the plural category.
 
MIH: But ICU MessageFormat doesn’t do selection without a function.  Secondly, there is only place in a message where a selector is declared, so no reuse occurs.
 
STA: The key here is whether selectors and placeholders are the same – that is the crux of the argument.
 
EAO: Or whether selectors and placeholders can be treated the same.
 
MIH: I still haven’t heard a use case where it is beneficial to treat selectors and placeholders the same, beyond the general idea of flexibility, but nothing concrete.
 
EAO: We discussed in the CLDR-TC+ICU-TC meetings that local variables are useful for matching.
 
MIH: No, local variables are useful for reusing in formatting, but not for selecting.
 
STA: Right, I think EAO proposed a few months ago to make it possible for selection to be done using local variables.  So I think that’s the crux of the argument.
 
MIH: But selection functions and formatting functions have different interfaces, so they are different.
 
STA: That is one way of implementing it, but I am trying to offer an alternative for another way of implementing it.
 
MIH: Selection and formatting are 2 different operations.  Each of the 2 distinct operations warrants its own interface.  If you want a user-defined type to implement both interfaces, that’s fine. But those 2 concepts need to be kept distinct.
 
ZBI: I feel the mental model that MIH is coming in with is significantly different from the mental model with which Fluent was built.  I wonder if this will let us implement our implementations, and let it decide which one is canonical.  I am not sure that we cannot derive that decision just now.
 
STA: I wanted to suggest a resolution. Perhaps this is different from what ZBI is saying. ZBI wants to defer a decision until we had an implementation. But rather, because EAO wants a strict superset of what MIH wants, we can go with the common intersection subset, which is to always require the narrower constraints – always require a formatting function for selectors.  Even though it may be inconsistent with the rules with placeholders, I think there are good reasons for the rules for placeholders and selectors, so it makes sense.
 
EAO: ECH, to your question about the question of what “first-class citizen” means about types in relation to partially formatted values, it is the wrong time to make a decision on this.  We don’t want to deviate from our spec too much at this point.
 
STA: ___ would serve as an archive of constraints 
 
MIH: I agree that this decision would change any of the current implementations – it is too late given our time deadlines.  I opened these issues in order for the group to decide on this for the future.
 
If the group decides that this is an implementation decision, then I would be fine. But I would still have to argue very strongly within Google that the linter would have to do a lot of work to be very strict to prevent this clear pitfall.  Imagine that you put it into ECMA-402 for JS Intl, if you provide values of a type unknown to the JS Intl MesageFormatv2 implementation, and the type is unknown to the default implementation, you will get unexpected behavior unless you do both of: specifying the formatter type, and add to the registry an appropriate function for that type.
 
MIH:
https://projectfluent.org/play/
```
message =
    {$foo ->
        [1] exactly 1
        [one] one message
       *[other] {$foo} messages
    }
```
In the Config tab:
```
{
    "foo": "1"
}
```
Result: `"1 messages"`
 
ECH: Given that we're discussing this issue for the future, I don't understand the distinction that ZBI was drawing between the mental models of what MIH is saying and what EAO is saying.  What MIH says makes sense -- we know that selection depends on the formatted value, so we should make formatting function required on the selector to ensure we get a formated value.  I still haven't heard a reason for why we should allow omitting the formatter function on a selector, but I like STA's way of framing things -- MIH's constraints allow a smaller strict subset of EAO's constraints, so we can go with MIH's constraints and require functions on selectors, and have a backwards-compatible evolution to the API in the future if we want to relax constraints.
 
STA: I realize that we’ve have different threads of discussion.  But maybe MIH and I can meet to discuss how we can implement the extensibility in both cases.
 
EAO: MIH, can we have what you're describing in the form a user story filed as an issue?
 
MIH: I’m talking about restricting selectors to always have the functions specified.  So the use case should be to describe why the restriction should be relaxed.
 
STA: Not about the selectors requiring functions, but rather, it’s the difference between 2 implementations – one that has the objects doing formatting versus one implementation having functions to do the formatting.  
 
MIH: The functional style allows you to support additional user-defined types that are not already known to the implementation.  I was just trying to describe how a system could be implemented to achieve the flexibility to support user-defined value types that we expect from MFv2.
 
STA: But the functional style restricts the types you can support.
 
ECH: I was following what MIH was saying, but I am confused by the last statement from STA.  Please add me to the meetings that you two have, STA and MIH.
 
MIH: Email to the ICU / CLDR Design list
 
> Dear ICU team & users,
>  
> I would like to propose the following API for: ICU 72
>
> Please provide feedback by: next Tuesday, 2022-08-26
>
> Designated API reviewer: Markus
>
> Ticket: [ICU-22124](https://unicode-org.atlassian.net/browse/ICU-22124)
> 
> This is for the Tech Preview of the MessageFormat v2 functionality that the Message Format Working Group (MFWG) has been working on for close to three years.
> 
> Right now, this is Java-only, and all of the APIs are marked @internal:
> 
> ```
>      * @internal ICU 72 technology preview
>      * @deprecated This API is for technology preview only.
> ```
> 
> For background on the proposal, APIs, and design, please see the original proposal document:
["ICU4J: MessageFormat2 APIs and Design"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NkHwFRWV9MiQROq4VVBh21tRMrP2DxpODg3fjHh0-Jw/)
> 
> This is entirely new functionality in entirely new source files and package; no existing source files are affected.
> 
> Best regards,
> Mihai

 