
Attendees:
Please fill in a 3-letter acronym if this is your first meeting:
- Suggestion 1: First letter of given name, First letter of surname, Last letter of surname
- Suggestion 2: First initial, middle initial, last initial
- Suggestion 3: Custom


### July 18th, meeting Attendees
- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting
Extended - <s>25 July;  1 Aug</s>

Plenary - 15 Aug

### Agenda
 
Review PR’s & Open Issues
 
 
## Review open issues
 
 
## Review PR's & Open Issues
 
RCA: We don't currently have any new open PRs.


STA: I would like to fix bugs in our current EBNF and also clarify the usage of whitespace in the syntax.
 
#289
 
STA: I think there is a consensus among participants that `let` is an acceptable keyword.  I will close the issue with a comment
 
#268
 
MIH: I was the one asking clarifications.  I didn't understand the points from RGN.
 
EAO: Let's return to this conversation when RGN is back.
 
#265
 
EAO: This is waiting on the CLDR-TC to see if they would be okay with starting up a new subcommittee to work on the resource syntax.
 
RCA: Should we keep it open?
 
EAO: Yes.
 
#262
 
EAO: We agreed last time to sidestep this for now for the purposes of the Technial Preview implementation by allowing these to passed through as black boxes.
 
RCA: Can we remove the `blocker` label?
 
STA: Yes, for the purposes of the technical preview, it's not a blocker.  It's also in the technical preview milestone, and we can remove this issue from there.
 
#261
 
STA: I think this was about using a different sigil like the `#` hash sign for named expressions or not.
 
MIH: I did use a different syntax for this. The only drawback is that you cannot tell what is local or not.
 
RCA: Can we close this or not?
 
MIH: From my side, we can close.
 
EAO: Should we keep it open?
 
STA: Currently, the syntax on the `develop` branch has a different sigil.  This is a good question to resolve once we get feedback from actual users. I don't think that anyone currently has strong feelings.
 
RCA: Should we comment that we are waiting for feedback?
 
EAO: Let's close and comment that we may choose to reopen based on feedback.
 
#259
 
EAO: I think we should leave this open because MWS had strong feelings about this. And STA is working on an editorial PR to describe changes.
 
#255
 
STA: This can be fixed.
 
#244
 
EAO: This is the black box.
 
MIH: No, this is not related to the black box solution for markup elements denoted with `+` and `-`.
 
EAO: Oh, this is related to function calls with no arguments.  I would fine with this being closed because we are okay with the syntax in question.
 
#243
 
STA: This is probably implementation dependent.
 
EAO: For the question of syntax, I think we should allow such syntax.
 
RCA: Should we record consensus on this, or leave it open?
 
STA: We can record a consensus on the syntax, and we leave it up to the implementations to figure out how to properly implement the behavior per runtime type of the formattable object.
 
EAO: And we also leave the implementation to determine how to interpret the semantics when no formatting function is provided.  But there too, we don't specify in our spec.
 
#241
 
RCA: Are we agreed on this?
 
MIH: I don't think we are.
 
RCA: Can I remove the `blocker` tag from the issue and remove from the tech preview milestone?
 
MIH: Yes.
 
#240
 
MIH: I think this whole space of display elements needs to be clarified.  You cannot close this one and leave the other issues open.  You can remove the `blocker` tag and remove it from the tech preview milestone, but it is still conjoined with the other related issues.
 
EAO: Agreed.
 
#238
 
MIH: I see this in the same bucket as the markup issues.
 
RCA: Do we all agree.
 
STA: Yes.  We need the technical preview more urgently than to solve these issues right now.
 
#236
 
STA: They got simpler now that we don't use brackets and round parentheses for delimiting patterns.
 
EAO: I think we specify that we use a minimal set of 
 
STA: One thing is that we don't use double quotes for value literals, instead we use parentheses. And we don't use square brackets for the pattern delimiters.
 
MIH: There is still some funniness about having to escape round parentheses.
 
STA: Yes, but it is still a big improvement and simplification.
 
#268 revisited
 
RGN: Given that some measure of escaping is required for the delimiters, what else is valid in the MFv2 string that we embed, ex: embedded in a JSON string.
 
EAO: Oh
 
RGN: For example, I think we should at least specify how the surrogate code points should be specified.
 
MIH: But should that be in MF specification?  For example, C allows unpaired surrogates or invalid UTF-8.  These are things that should be invalidated at the edge, not at every level of the stack.
 
EAO: But 
 
RGN: Yes, you couldn't even save a file as UTF-8 if you had certain code points in between the delimiters, for example the surrogate code points.  That would be detrimental to the functionality, and I'm not aware of any purpose this would serve.
 
EAO: Should we make an editorial PR to specify this?
 
MIH: I'm in agreement with you that these types of sequences would be invalid, but does specifying this in the standard require every implementation to check for this in their implementation to be valid?
 
RGN: We would first assume that a MF string that is parsed
 
MIH: I think that would be expensive to implement.
 
RGN: That is how everything is implemented -- CSS, HTML, JavaScript.
 
MIH: If I create a UTF-8 file and put an invalid sequence in there, then what happens?  Does it get dropped, does it get converted to the invalid Unicode character?
 
RGN: HTML is difficult, and it may be dropped.
 
MIH: Right, I'm not ready to assume that what is provided is a sequence of code points. This makes things expensive.  We can drop to only assuming that we get a sequence of code points.
 
EAO: I think we want MF, just like all layers of the stack, to validate the string.
 
MIH: This will also complicate the parser.
 
RGN: But we already have the parser rejecting `\l` then the same rejection logic should be rejecting other invalid sequences of code units.
 
If your parser is implementing a parser for UTF-16, then you 
 
RGN: The grammar for MF is defined in terms of code points.  If you're folding in the lower-level concern to get UTF-8 representing code units vs UTF-16 vs. CECU UTF-8, but the grammar is the same regarding terminal code points.  But it 
 
MIH: Yes, but the rejection should be happening earlier.
 
RGN: I think it is should be in scope to define what happens when you receive invalid UTF-8 strings.
 
MIH: Do we make it in scope to validate UTF-8?
 
RGN: Yes.
 
MIH: I'm trying to the bridge between the syntax and the implementation.  I'm just trying to understand the implication of this idea on the tech preview implementation that I'm working on.
 
STA: I think we would like to somehow express that we only accept valid code points.
 
MIH: What I'm trying to put my finger on, is do we say that we reject such invalid sequences of code units, or do we say that it is just an error but is undefined behavior?
 
RGN: Also, some implementations will replace inavlid code units with the replacement code point. And that is one way to solve this problem that I am proposing.
 
EAO: We could just copy XML: https://www.w3.org/TR/xml/#charsets
 
STA: We can go further and also exclude control characters.  There was a previous discussion in Fluent with API https://github.com/projectfluent/fluent/issues/182. Fluent decided to be very lenient about it, but maybe RGN is right.
 
RCA: What is the resolution here?
 
STA: I'm okay forbidding incomplete surrogate pairs?
 
RGN: Could we tackle it piecemeal?  First disallow unpaired surrogate code points, and then later consider other code points that are awkward to represent?
 
STA: Is the consequence of it that, if we ban surrogate pairs, then UTF-16 encoded strings--
 
RGN: It's not banning surrogate pairs.  The point of surrogate code points is to have a range of code points in the BMP that can express code points outside of the BMP when taken together in pairs. So they are a UTF-16 consideration.  But that then means that these are the only code points cannot be encoded in UTF-8.  I believe that this is the only part of the grammar that is unrestricted.
 
RCA: What should we do?
 
RGN: I think this PR is needed, so I will do it.
 
#233
 
EAO: I would be happy to leave this open because ZBI has actively participated in the discussion and isn't here now.
 
#209
 
EAO: Let's remove the syntax tag from this.
 
## Implementation Status 
 
EAO:  Reviewing the Data Model originated on the JS implementation at https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-messageformat
 
RCA: Can we have a playground to show some live examples of this?
 
STA: It is nice to see a working implementation of this. I had a comment about the data model of the parsed output, that is related to how you separated PatternMessage from SelectMessage.  I think it would be nice to have that division, and just have to have the SelectMessage.  The reason is that it makes it trivial for tooling to make it possible to start adding variants without having to change the kind of message data structure.
 
The other thing is that I would call them definitions, not declarations.
 
EAO: I also have tooling that is public on NPM under the `messageformat` package.  It can accept MF1 syntax strings and turn it into a MF2 data model / formatter.  There is also a part of the package that can accept Fluent syntax pattern strings and do something similar.
 
I have not yet published the XLIFF support to NPM yet because it needs revisiting.  That is why I tagged these components separately in NPM. Currently, the MF1 and Fluent support is just one-way at the moment.
