### October 31st, meeting Attendees
- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)


### Agenda
 
Scope of MF 2.0 Deliverables 
Do deliverables include the function registry?
Do we need extended meetings for the time being?
Perhaps go back to monthly plenaries and re-invite some people?
 
##  Scope of MF 2.0 Deliverables 
 
EAO: MessageFormat 2 might be a stack/set of related specifications.  Others may want to create other specs on top of this in other places like ECMA-402, Unicode, etc.  My understanding is that we’re creating a minimal sufficient set of specs to support other derivative specs to be built.
 
MIH: That is my understanding. I would propose that we individually (not in a meeting) go through the issues, mark them as proposed-blocker. Then, as a group and based on what is in scope, we can decide on what are deliverables, label them as blockers, and must finish them before a final completion of our spec.
 
STA: It is good to go back to the [list of deliverables](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/guidelines/goals.md#deliverables)  We have a proposal for a canonical syntax, we have a data model.  One trouble that I think we’ve been having is that some of the things are difficult to define because they depend on the environment in which we run. We could define the canonical data model, but an implementation might differ in how they design it.
 
ECH: Data model shouldn’t change.  The point is that it is something that 
 
STA: The idea of the data model is good, but even in these discussions, we chose to deal in terms of syntax.  And so long as different implementations can serialized and deserialize the canonical syntax, then it ensures interoperability.
 
MIH: We can describe the data model in terms of abstract data types without depending on any specific programming language. Portability of the implementations in a specific language to another language is not necessarily realistic, nor is it necessary.
 
EAO: What does a consumer of the data model look like? Who benefits from it? Being able to take a C function and use it in a Rust impl – does that happen? Do we want to enable it? One client benefiting from the data model would be us. By having a spec based on a data model, we can have non-canonical syntaxes that we support so long as they can map to the data model.
 
MIH: Yes, I agree, we should be the first client, and make sure that we can define functionality based on the data model, mapping to xliff, etc.. Users with custom formatter functions would be another client. And writers of parsers can be another client.
 
STA: There are different use cases.  If we say that we ourselves are a client that can help define the other parts of the spec, that sounds good. Yes, we should have a canonical data model. But what we are perhaps conflating with others parts is interoperability. Interoperability is guaranteed by a canonical syntax.  The syntax allows us to describe things like maps which C has no data literal syntax for them.
 
We can provide what we make as canonical, and not mandate all of that entirely, so as to allow implementations to define their own data model.
 
EAO: The parallel I would look at is what other programming languages do. They have a particular syntax to represent constructs.  LLVM is an intermediate representation that allows different programming languages (front ends) to compile to the same IR.
 
STA: An alternative is to allow each implementation to have its own serialization that converts back and forth to the canonical data model.  But there 
 
ECH: That should be okay. Implementations could have different syntaxes, and so long as they support the data model, that’s fine. They can extend the data model to support 
 
MIH: I agree that in the end, that to say that we have a portable data model is useless. C and Java has maps and arrays.  If someone wants an implementation in Java, it will be likely be after ICU4J’s implementation is available, and they can decide what parts of the ICU4J they want or not. We shouldn’t struggle to make the data model to be compatible across implementations.  But for the first users, we should be mindful to make them consistent.
 
EAO: I have 3 examples in mind that this discussion is relevant for.  There is an argument that we might want to represent data in the data model that isn’t JSON-ifiable.  Is the data model representing pure data, or can we have elements that can’t somehow?  We need not discuss how that’s possible now.  Second, we have cases in which we need to refer to elements that ______.  We need a way of selecting among the various variants/cases in a selection message.  We can represent such selection messages as a switch/case statement or an ordered map, but we don’t need to be specific about that.  Third, having line numbers and other things represented could be useful instead of having placeholders.  So placeholders are not always necessary, so if an implementation chooses not to use placeholders, then that should not be a problem if it is not a superset of a canonical implementation.
 
STA: I’m okay with different data models, but I’m not okay with different syntaxes.  Once someone tries to extend the syntax, then we have non-interoperable functionality.
 
EAO: To clarify, you are only talking about the MessageFormat 2 syntax, right?  We would allow an ICU MessageFormat v1 parser to convert that into a MessageFormat 2 syntax.
 
STA: I don’t think we need to be precise about other syntaxes.
 
EAO: Specifically, the MessageFormat 2 data model, not syntax.
 
STA: Back to interoperability, I think the syntax must be the same.
 
MIH: My thinking about this is that the data model and the syntax that we propose will map to each other seamlessly. Parsing another syntax into the data model allows it to be used by the same machinery for MessageFormat 2. We shouldn’t want to standardize or make pronouncements on other syntaxes, and people are free to make other syntaxes, but they are on their own.
 
EAO: Overall, we are agreeing. Let’s shift back to talking about what parts are in scope for MessageFormat 2, like the function registry.
 
STA: There will be different implementations of MessageFormat 2. They could be in the same or different programming languages. I’m not arguing for the compatibility of custom function implementations.  When I think of the function registry, I think we want to provide a specification of how we specify the functions available.
 
MIH: Like a schema. 
 
STA: Yes, we should come out with a schema that is cross-platform that can be consumed 
 
ECH: 
 
EAO: The question is, say for a plural formatting function, do we define how a plural formatting function’s inputs/outputs and how it should behave? Or do we define how someone else would define a plural .formatting function?
 
STA: For me, it is the latter.
 
MIH: To describe the schema, it is more than just a schema. We would want some description of behaviors that controlled by the input values, which goes beyond just the types of things. For example XLIFF. It goes beyond that schema (the element foo has these attributes & and these children), to specify what each element represents and how to use it for localization.

About whether we should predefine or pre-populate the registry with items.  It is a useful thing to consider what the current functions look like in the registry, even if it is not a part of the standard.  It is good to put things in there to see how it works. Otherwise we design in an ivory tower. We propose a registry schema, but we are not even sure that schema can represent the existing functionality we have in MF1 / ECMAScript / Fluent.
We can also propose those things as the initial submission for the registry content, with no guarantees that they will be approved “as is” or not.
We should work as if populating the registry is managed by a different entity than the MFWG (which will probably be the case).
 
ECH: I’m hearing two different threads of conversation, and we can pick up with these next week. 1) Defining a schema of sorts in which functions can be defined for the registry, and 2) whether it is okay to prepopulate a registry implementation with functions not declared in the standard for beta testing purposes, without intending or expecting to impose their inclusion in the standard.  Let’s pick up from there next time.
 
MIH: adding for next time: do we have one registry, managed by one single entity (probably ICU/CLDR)? Or separate registries (ICU/CLDR, ECMAScript, Microsoft, Apple, etc.)?
My wish / vote is for one single registry.
 
