### November 21st, meeting Attendees
- Romulo Cintra - Igalia (RCA)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCU)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt O’Conor - Bloomberg (MOC)
- Addison Phillips - self - (APP)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda
- Presentation - "Intl.MessageFormat.parseResource()" - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OUlaN_kx3t6puqWoWHSwPSrUNRFrhTo-QqAedceonCo/edit#slide=id.p)
- Chair Group - Discuss current status and future
- Review Open Issues
  * Decide on formatting to something other than text [#272](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/272)
  * Support for BiDi in placeables [#28](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/28)
  * Add Bidirectional Isolation section to formatting [#315](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/315)
- Marked some issues as **blocker-candidate**. These are issues that I think need to be resolved before declaring the spec “done”. Would be good to review, and the ones we agree on change to **blocker**. (MIH)
 

## Presentation - "Intl.MessageFormat.parseResource()"
 
EAO: I have been talking with STA and ZBI about the idea of a format for resources.  We have a [repository](https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg).  Someone has also asked about Google’s ARB format.
 
I am presenting these [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OUlaN_kx3t6puqWoWHSwPSrUNRFrhTo-QqAedceonCo/edit#slide=id.p) for the first time before next week’s TC39 meeting.
 
MIH: I’m less opinionated about JavaScript. My only comment is about slide 7 regarding the Intl.MessageFormat.parseResource.  That seems backwards, it looks like MessageFormat parses resource bundles. Every other system has a resource manager that loads resources. And it loads more than strings.
 
EAO: Since we’re talking about JavaScript, and we have a large range of resources that might be used, you would have a resource manager that would parse resources.  It is similar to how JSON.parse() which is a static method.
 
SCU : My main concerns are related with performance , the parsing performance for JSON , do you have any work around that ? 
 
EAO: No, I haven’t done work on that. It’s something we should take into consideration but isn’t the unique that we should look at to get better performance.
 
ZBI: I authored similar parser in the past(Fluent), I don’t have the numbers but we were able to get parity on perf
 
ECH: How you make the the splitting of the resource manager code  ?  More importantly, we have the same problem of the implementation being the specification. Why can’t we have a specification like we have a data model 
 
EAO : For the resource manager is a question I’m not trying to answer here, API is taking in a resource as string representation and figuring it out. This not aim to be a complete solution, 
 
APP : The resource is already an item ? is not a resource bundle but instead the resolved thing
 
ECH : I believe this can be decoupled 
 
EAO : You mean this is complex or simple ?


ECH : I said complex 

APP : MIH’s reaction is like mine. When I was at Amazon, the resource bundle can host a MessageFormat, but here you have it the other way around.
 
EAO: Maybe there is a problem with naming that is causing confusion?
 
APP: Possibly.  I took MessageResource to mean a resource bundle.  Apart from the names, what is the objective of this proposal?  I think others will have a similar confusion.
 
ECH: Resource manager could just provide a message then you provide that in turn to create message format object, so this can be decoupled as way to simplify it.
 
ZBI: I’m raising the flag for potential performance penalties depending on the way we go. If we have to parse multiple times we loose some benefits of this model
 
ECH: We shouldn’t sacrifice having the simple APIs in the name of optimization.  We should at least have the simple design, and we can have both. Can we have a specification from what we are proposing here ? 
 
ECH: The problem of having a specification should be addressed at some point. That seems like an obviously important thing, just as we’ve done before with the data model for the message, to avoid the problems of “the specification is the implementation” problem of ICU MessageFormat currently..
 
EAO: All I’m doing here is proposing Stage 1, which is just an indication that is a useful things to explore.  A Stage 2 proposal would require 
 
STA: My comment will be similar to what people have previously said about distinguishing between a Message, MessageResource, etc.  Previously, we have been focusing on the building block of the set of functionality.  But now we can design from both sides, including starting from what we want and working backwards to decide the API.  Starting the API design perspective can inform what we’re trying to do.
 
EAO: One aspect of the API design here is determining the bit that we ought to bake into JavaScript forever.  The more complex the API is, the more fragile it becomes.
 
APP: One of my concerns is about adoption and usability by end user and developers, if start by specifying a format would also raise concerns on tools that needs to adapt to new formats etc…
 
There are a ton of libraries that exist for managing strings, and it would be useful for people to be able to plug in to those to get messages.  Pulling that into JavaScript might be cool, but a lot of library people would be sad, and it would have the problem of warring formats.
 
EAO: Stage 2 proposal needs to have representation either of a string of a single message working on MF runtime or an representation of entire resource messages in specific format like json.  So an ICU representation should be possible to be passed for a data representation and passed to a construct from Intl API, this is not imposing any message syntax or message resource, instead provide way to developer support theirs solutions with language built ins
 
APP: Is there a reason where you didn’t go for a map-like interface where you have a key on the left side, and message on the right side.
 
EAO: Does this example in the slides cover that?
 
APP: What I don’t understand is why you wouldn’t just provide a map interface?  Instead, you’re making the map internally and not letting users provide a map themselves.
 
EAO: I am providing map.  The benefit of this is that you can use it like it JSON, where `JSON.parse()` is static method.
 
MIH: It was already touched upon by a couple of comments, but I want to make sure that it is addressed properly. The idea of loading everything at start time would be a performance hit.
 
Our experiences differ quite a lot, my experience a tiny percentage of string are at screen at same time, so some google apps have 9000 strings but in our applications,  we only have 10 or 20 messages at same time. 
 
That is true in general for software.  The difference is I would like to parse only 10 or 20 messages, rather than have to parse all 9000 strings in the resource.
 
The result of that mapping is string to MF so every key/val is parsed according to MF2 syntax, so if I get a string and have to parse it for all the messages independently if using it or not we have performance footguns. Performance is parsing + memory, so parsing bits of that information would be always better than batch all results at once. 
 
It forces everything to be in the MessageFormat syntax.  Even if it is CSS, it needs to be in the syntax, or else it needs to be in yet another file format.
 
ZBI: I’ll answer MIH first, I envision making this parser work is going to require contextual understanding from the beginning and end of the message depending on what you want to produce , parsed or stringified message. So this go against having multiline message  and human readable messages, so what I mean by double parsings is the understanding of multiline messages as first time, message parse.  
 
MIH, you should step out of your mental model of Android, and my example is CSS.  We don’t have to parse all of the CSS rules/files for a given UI, we only need to parse the CSS file relevant to a specific screen.  
 
So this model is similar to css where messages will be spread across files need for each “screen” so the cost of parsing will reside on architecture.


MIH: My mental model is not necessarily the Android one, it’s based on every platform I’ve seen in the last 20 years.
 
ZBI: In java props the recognition of the end of message is not related with content of it , the current proposal has to do it to 
 
MOC (via chat): When does the 2nd parse come into place after the initial load?
 
ZBI: The 2 approaches we are approaching are, the first is that we parse the resource file to identify the locations of messages without parsing the message.  The other approach is to parse the resource file and then parse the message strings identified within it.
 
EAO: This proposal tries to possibility of going either way at level of implementation , you can have a single parser that parse the content or parse the whole file. The reason why syntax doesn’t need to use additional wrappers is because we discover that doing reference counting on braces it’s more work but results and doesn’t increase complexity and results should be quite performant as well. 
 
STA: I understand the unwillingness to double parsing proposed by ZBI.  The stigma probably comes from original proposals didn’t have clear demarcation of messages.  But now we have open and close curly braces to delimit messages, so we can probably make a double-pass parser pretty fast.
 
From APP’s comments, I see the benefit the value of working with a map of stringified messages.  I want to make the point that it is eager versus lazy.  What EAO is proposing can be implemented by APIs based on splitting up the work.
 
ZBI: I am losing confidence in my claim that we can’t have double performance, or that we would have to sacrifice significant performance.  The second point of storing stringified messages in a map would reduce the value of this proposal versus storing this just as JSON.
 
One of the values is that you are operating as an editor of a file containing messages of a consistent message syntax.  If you treat it as a map whose values are message strings.  What happens if there is an error in the message.  I don’t think it is a dealbreaker; I think we can work around it.  It is not just simplification, I think it will complicate things in a number of places.
 
EAO, on slide 7, the ergonomics of loading resources is reminiscent of loading CSS, and that brings up the utility of having message references.  From the memory management point of view, it is tricky to have a function to operate on this line.
 
EAO: Doing a sketch on that would be a nice idea to as a proof of concept
 
MOC: It was my understanding that MFv2 has a hierarchical structure and reuse is a design goal.  If we don’t have parsing at the message level or the bundle file, then that’s something that we have to figure out.
 
EAO :  We have both API’s providing the same sort of message reference and reuse capabilities, The message resource is defining how API looks from outside and can be used when parse resource is run can work in a lazy manner as we call async and build MF instances Lazy. Proposal is not stating how this should work on. 
 
STA: I want to go back to the eagerness vs. laziness regarding the design of returning a map of strings or not.  What is the atom here?  Is it a bundle of messages or is it a message?  We are sending it over the wire and across boundaries.  The precedent here, in the form of ICU MessageFormat, we stick to the string representation because there is no data model.  We shouldn’t jump to dismissing this as a thing that MFv2 should be doing. Maybe both can coexist.  As another example, the DOM has an interface for a CSS to be applied or added to the set of rules. But there is also a method to allow instantiating from a string.  We don’t have to worry about a single representation being transported because the representation of a string. The design here will impact how people will use this API in a fundamental way.
 
MIH: It’s again back to whether to parse to string.  We have `res.get(...)` shows that we are mixing concerns between a resource manager and a message.  In reality, you address messages across file boundaries, for example a file may reference a DTD.
 
ZBI: I think STA conflated 2 concepts that shouldn’t be conflated. In CSS, a file isn’t a stylesheet.  In fluent, a file isn’t a message bundle.  The storage of messages is separate from a bundle.  An example is that a stylesheet can be made from multiple CSS files.  I see the proposal here as one potential source of messages, because we could get messages over the air or from a database.  The main benefit of a resource file is that you operate over the messages in a certain context.
 
## Chair Group
 
RCA: I want to collaborate on how we can be more productive in the group. We have been in this group for 3 years, starting on 2019-11-25.  We still have 6 of the original 12 people in this group.  I want to go through the things we’ve done over the last 3 years. We have the technical preview after all of the discussions and different approaches to have those discussions. I’m happy with the progress we have made so far. Since I’ve been trying to give more time than I really have, I’m stepping down from being a member of the Chair Group. The thing that I want to talk about is the future because we need to continue on our strong position and encourage more people to join or rejoin.  I’ll still be participating in the group, but from a different perspective.  I want to know how we can help move the group forward in a collective effort, and not just a 1-2 person effort.
 
EAO: Does this take effect immediately, or when does this occur?
 
RCA: I am not stepping down from participating in the group, but I am stepping down from my most involved way as the Chair of the group and as a member of the Chair Group.
 
EAO: Who is in the Chair Group currently?
 
RCA: I need to find the list.  It is also out of date and needs to be updated.
 
ECH: Do you have any ideas for how to 
 
RCA: It was hard to keep the Chair Group convening in a constant cadence. So improving the cadence of the Chair Group would help a lot.
 
APP: If you’re going to have a chair of chairs, who is responsible for coordinating things, then we need to have someone to step up.  You either have a name or names (plural) who take the responsibility over. Otherwise things don’t happen.
 
I’d consider being a chair.
 
EAO: Can we have an asynchronous way to consider this idea?
 
RCA: I’ll follow offline / post an issue to continue this conversation.
 
EAO: It would also be good to mention the list of Chair Group members.
 
RCA: <https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/guidelines/chair-group-members.md>
 
 
## Review Open Issues
 
### Decide on formatting to something other than text #272
 
MIH: I am not sure that we will define exactly how the parts will look like when we format to parts (or format to whatever non-string representation).  I imagine the resolution will say something like we will format to parts without saying how the parts will look like, exactly.
 
APP: A lot of my experience is thinking about what people want to do with the parts.  Let’s say that part of the output is a currency, and you need to decorate that when formatting to HTML.  You don’t need to know how the number formatter works in order to do that.  Mentally, it makes sense to me that MessageFormat produces a sequence of things, and that it makes sense that they have structure/metadata attached to them and available.
 
ZBI: We’re going through a design reviewing of something we’re calling `icu_pattern` in ICU4X as a generic way to represent patterns for formatters and the output representation from formatters.  One of the APIs could provide an Iterator over the parts, perhaps filtered by provided criteria.
 
The question relevant here is whether the parts are producing BiDi control codes, or are they just holding metadata 
 
STA: In this proposal, who interweaves / zips the iterators?
 
ZBI: The user has to zip the iterators.
 
APP: One of the things I want to communicate about the BiDi topic is that we are not trying to re-run the BiDi algorithm and not attempting to provide ranges of directional text.  Instead, just providing the limits of parts, like placeholders. And directionality can be data that is a part of a placeholder.
 
EAO: For #272, I haven’t heard someone say that we should propose explicitly what the parts look like.
 
MIH: I can write the PR to describe this in the specification.